        f) Levinas, Perverter
*             i) Throughout his work, most evidently in Totality and Infinity, Levinas employs motifs of kinship to describe my connection with alterity.   When he describes the world as being "familiar to us" (TI 33), Levinas implies that experience is constituted as family members.  Through each perspective of the ethical "relationship" (TI 39) opened at each instant of the ethical genealogy, the Other figures as a different relative: the father of futural fecundity (TI 274-277), the wife of the economic home (TI 154-156), the brother of political fraternity (TI 278-280), the sister soul of incestuous Eros (TI 254), and so on.   The prevalence of these gendered family tropes has led many commentators to criticize Levinas for having a sexist and heteronormative bias.  Over half a century ago in the foundational work of modern French feminism, The Second Sex, Simone de Beauvoir accused Levinas's figuration of woman as Other to be "an assertion of masculine privilege” (xvi n3).  More recently, this protest has been expressed more angrily, with a recent article claiming that Levinas’s work articulates a “demonization of femininity and erasure of maternity” (Walsh 97).
*             ii) On the one hand, the feminist objection to Levinas’s language seems to be exactly correct. Without a doubt, Levinas uses gendered motifs throughout his philosophy, deploying familial structures inherited from both the Judaic and the Greek legacies of patriarchy.[1]  At all moments of our reading, this should indeed trouble us.  We should always refrain from masquerading his gendered language by replacing masculine pronouns with feminine ones, neutral ones, or even the hermaphroditic “he or she”; perhaps we should cease altogether to use “it” in our translations. We must keep in mind that Levinas articulates Humanisme de l’autre Homme, “Humanism of the Other Man,” and not, as a recent translation would have it, “Humanism of the Other.”  On the other hand, only to claim that Levinas “privileges” the masculine over the feminine overlooks the more essential question: what does “privileging” mean and should we necessarily privilege the privileged over the secondary?  
*             iii) Alongside the violence of critical protest yet against the violence of rhetorical horthodoxy, we can still embrace the subversive potential of violent speech by interpreting Levinas blasphemously.[6]  In contrast to Cohen’s hierarchical and orthodox moralism, our subversive and radical reading will attempt to reveal the immanent roots, the poetic dimension within Levinas’s hyperbolic, transcendental prose.[7]  Such a reading will show that, although Levinas deliberately uses filial tropes throughout his work, this would only constitute a "problem" if it were read in a hermeneutically "straight" manner.  Beneath the apparent hetero-normative veneer of Levinas's prose lurk traces of queerness.  The ethical relationship is directed not simply from masculine Self to feminine Other, but is everywhere perverted.
*             iv) See Levinas, Perverter:  https://www.waste.org/~roadrunner/writing/Levinas/LevinasPerverter_20_1.htm
* 
* 
* CHAPTER: Levinas, Perverter: Perversion of Ethics and Ethics of Perversion
* Probably actually a section of chapter 4 on Ethical ‘Pataphysics
* See Appendix for full paper
* 