In this talk, I intend to continue my efforts to develop anarchafeminist thinking by bringing anarchocommunist thinking into conversation feminist discussions of care ethics. 

I begin with Kropotkin's assertion that mutual aid and mutal support are "a feature of the greatest importance for the maintenance of life, the preservation of each species, and its further evolution".

Let's begin with the question of what we mean by evolution. Evolution is the study of how life tranforms over time.  It is a specific instance of what philosophers might call a theory of Becoming. In the most simple manner, the idea of Becoming is contrasted with the idea of what  Evolution is a study of how things transform and develop over time.  It's a more general aspect of the question of how do things transform and change over time.  In what way do we say that an identity persists over time or how does things transform over time.  Classical qusetion pursued by philosophers throughout time.  The most basic answer to this is given from Heraclitus and the generations that are influenced in this idea of heraclitus.  Heraclitus based on the two statements that "everything flows" that one can not put ones foot in the same river twice"  the source of this becoming is conflict
“War is the father of all and the king of all; and some he has made gods and some men, some bond and some free.”
This idea of conflict or struggle as the most primordial force in the cosmos is really the root of so much of how we consider the devlopment of all things to be the principle of war.  And this idea that there are two things here that are distinct and interesting.  The first is that there are anonymous forces interacting with each other.  Nameless forces.  And that their mode of interaction is some form of strife and struggle.  This is the foundation for a lot of other intuitions and descriptoins of how things evolve over time.  From empiricism, the basic idea of the billiard balls colliding with each other and that is what makes the world go around.  From Nietzsche, the idea that force or a will to power is the fundamental thing that drives the world, that forces work through us and are expressed through us and that they motivate and collide.  Antihumanism of Deleuze or Foucault the idea that everything is reducible to a field of forces or of impersonal desires working their ways through us.  Even in the force way that there are relations 

Instead of this I would like to talk about  a different form of the interaction of becoming that is the one taken from Levinas.  The importance of this is that it's not in the form of a war and it's not in the terms of an anonymous form of the nameless forces colliding with each other.  

Levinas identifies two moments of interacting with the world, each of which 

First of all is the way in which the self emerges from the other people.  Levinas describes this as a metabolic moment.  The metabolism of being as a combination of the breathing and the eating.  A way that we make Levinas explains this as through two separate ways of description.  The first is what he calls nourishment, nourissement, which also means nursing from the world.  The eating is a mode of incorporation of the outside, the mode in which the outside becomes myself.  the world is not merely stuff that comes to us, but is already implicated in the other.  Our consumption is what reaches us through the intercession of other people.  When we have a commodity from the world, this reaches us as the product of someone else's labor.  We perceive this as the accumulation of other people as products as consumables.  the objectification of things and the production of objects.  These come to us as the alienated and objectified remnants of the life of others.  The way that we are composed of the other person in such a way that it is their death that constitutes our life.  The products that come to us are the alienated products.  We exist vampirically off of the remnants of the lives of others.  Life energy of the other person, of the laborer.  Marx has a running idea that it's not just a labor theory of value, where labor is already an abstracted commodity away from the person, but that the capiatalism extracts their labor power, that it is alreayd their life force being sacrificed for the production of our own needs.  

In a similar fashion, we can talk about breathing.  Our bodies are consist of the air that is the porduct of other people.  the air that was in our bodies is the oxygen that was in the bodies of other people and the air that is in our bodies will be the air of other people.  This air isn't just a part of us but it constitutes who and what we are chemically.  The air is not shared but is already somehow the substance of who I am is already the substance of the other preson's life

This separate existence of being oneself but that the housing that oneslef is already inherited and dependant on others.  It appears as if we are self related but actually our own autonomy is a retrospective illusion and a forgetting of the ways in which we are alreayd dependant of each other


Genetic moment of our relationships to others.  The way in which we are related to other people is already a birthing and a creation. Levinas already indicates this in his language for eating by saying that we are already creted from"nourishment" that this word is alreayd the idea of nursing.  that we are already the babies of other people.  The genetic relationship of time.  the other inherits the other's substance as something other than himself.  the carrying on of the substance of the past into the future.  That the person is other from the past but somehow still responsible and responsibe to what that past was.  The material of creation is the body that becomes mine and is birthed into mine . 

A genetics of being that means that its not just stuff but it's a materiality of birth.  It's common for thinkers to say that we are constituted by our "relations" but then it's also that we are related to other people.  We are constituted to people that we are unchosen and undesired.  This origin that we have and these connections that obtain between other poeple are not chosen and yet here we are somehow responsible to each other.  

The modern fantasy of the self-given law.  That the only thng that we can recognizes as authoritative is somehting that is chosen by us.  But rather that we are alaways somehow indebted to other people 

And a model of living that occurs thorgh out the world is that of the household or the oikos.  THe economic relationships that we make for each other is perverted by the idea of domination that is explored by Aristotle.  On the one hand, we have the idea that there is a household manager.  That the man is the person who is repsonsible for dominating needs and that it requires the person of the householder to control it and that the person that is the controller of the household and the one who then makes the way that the needs are controlled and that this is what requires a system of domination and control.  On the other hand the idea that the person is someone htat there is a meal tub fellows that it is a place where people gather together to meet their needs.  And that we are somehow constituted by and through our needs and that we meet together in the home.  The idea of the home and the social is that we nurturance  of each other.  bell hooks speaks of this in her essay on homeplace.  That the need for a home is a way that people retreat to in order to be healed and be taken care of 


This idea of maternity that is explored through the wrok of Sarah Ruddick.  The illusion that wer are dependent  but the fact that the world is somehow 

We can see this idea of maternity as reflected in the ideas of ecofemnism.  The idea of maternal practice as reflected in the work of Sarah Ruddick.  There is a threefold goal of the mohter which is namely to take care of the kid, to preserve the planet.  Ruddick presents the work of maternal practice as being threefold: 
  Ruddick defines the maternal standpoint not as an instinctive disposition or a specifically gendered role but rather as a set of practices that preserves the life of the child, nourishes their growth and prepares them for acceptance in the wider society.  Given that human infants are not physically or mentally capable of taking care of themselves for extended periods of time, the maternal practice that preserves human life is essential for both individual and collective survival

We also find this in Ariel Salleh who recommends that we do this for the planet as a whole 

Then we can talk about Sarah Hrdy.  Hrdy makes it clear that the key thing for our role is not the mother herself but also the entire community of what seh calls allomothering  

In her book "Mothers and Others", the feminist anthropoligist investigates the evolutioary origins of mutal understanding, the theory of mind that people have a recognition that other people are related to each other.  This is a thing that is also known as the prosocial tendencies.  why people are eager to colaborate with each other

eager to share and wiling to cooperate with each other
how important shared care and provisioning of offspring by group members other than parents are to shaping prosocial impulses
minins meant that youngsters grew up depending on a wider
range of caretakers than just their mothers, and this de­pen­dence pro-
duced selection pressures that favored individuals who were better at de-
coding the mental states of others, and figuring out who would help and
who would hurt.

cooperative breeding

dependent on multiple caretakers rather tna a single caretaker

brains require care before care requires brains

allopaternal assistance means that mothers conserve energy stay better nourished remain safer from predation and other hazards and survive to lead longer lives.  because mothers wean babies sooner, reproduce at an an accelerated pace

food sharing is crucial because infants can remain dependent without imposing an overwhelming burden o their mothers

nothing in the anthropological literature suggests that a human mother monopolozes for her own children or suppresses breeding opportunities for subordinates

african peoples hunter gathering  egalitarian character of groups    sanctions against alpha male brutality and bullies braggarts and stingy

humans should be considered eusocial mammals because they evolved to rely on allopaternal care, live in multigenerational societies and have a specialized class of sterile ehlpers in the form of postmenopausal women

what is different abut  humans is that their longer lifespan after they are no longer 

longer lifespans evolutionary elaborations on cooperative breedings


shared care crucial precondition for the evolution of intersubjectivity 

why postproductive women work so hard 
why creatures who could not direclty contribute to the gene pool of the next generation would continue to survive

the reason why old women livedd longer after they ovulate is impact on their grandchildren

most daring in defending from infanticidal males

mother supported ranks become enormous for the breeding of the children and the growth of the clan

spends the most time near the youngest or least experienced daughter who needs her support

women know where to find the tubers

oldest group memebers who know where the food is and the sharing and teaching and memory of food sources

grandmothers influence the reproductive success of kin
wherever there is high average mortality grandmothers are essential to child survival


grandmother's presence has more impact than the father's does

the more experienced the mother the more crucial is the presence of the grandmother

differences in maternal and paternal grandmother

maternal grandmothers in partciular attach a high proiotiy in keeping their mother and children as well nourished and healthy as posible

having a grandmother is the ace in the hole for the reproduction of the species and survivability 

the origin of human kinship sytstens cines frin tghe need to have the numbr of coopreative breeding from individuals besides the mother extendint the need for family

shared care is the purview of primates 

slower grownnthe longer childhoods and bigger brains grew from shared care among humans, cooperative breeding
well fed and cared for 

evolutionary incresaes in brain size
cooperative breeding is the pre existing condition that permitted the evoutoin of these traits  
cognitive and emotional implications of shared breeding

added support from having matrilineal kin nearby promotied trust

centrifugal pressures of modern era emphasis on individualism and persona independance undermine social connection

infant survival depend on ability of infants to maintain contact and nurture from mother and others 
in developing brains

patriarchal ideology chasity of women women as property male undercuts the priority of childdrens well being first 

persons' responsivelness to infants is acquired through experince and nurturing and being nurtured


most important is how she remembers her own birth experince

attachment relationship emotinal state of allomothers providing their care


> This talk will investigate Kropotkin's description of mutual aid as being critical for the evolution of a species.  The idea of "evolution" will be considered as a theory of Becoming, the way that identity and non-identity are persisted and not-persisted over time.  We will contrast our theory those that derive from Heraclitus (materialism, empiricism, Hume, Hobbes, Spinoza, Nietzsche, Heidegger, Deleuze, Simondon, Read, Bottici ...)), which posit Becoming as emerging from the dynamic clashes within a field of anonymous forces. My analysis, taken from Emmanuel Levinas, articulates Becoming a mode of relating to other persons through two moments: (1) the *metabolics* of consumption describe the process by which the material being of the other becomes the self, which Levinas explores under the motifs of eating and breathing; (2) the *genetics* of regeneration describe the way in which the material being of my self becomes the other, which Levinas describes under the motif of maternity.  I will explore "maternity" through what Sarah Ruddick calls *maternal practice* that preserves the life of the child, nourishes their growth and prepares them for acceptance in wider society.  Feminist anthropologist Sarah Blaffer Hrdy clarifies that what is important is not merely the person of the mother, but the community of *allomothering*-- particularly the *grandmother*, the person who takes care both of the child and the mother of the child, as the most fundamental resason for the evolution of human understanding and prosocial behavior.  The talk will end by reflecting on thinking across generations, as many native peoples do, about how we can enrich our regenerational thinking and practice as anarchists.