            i) 
* SECTION: Metaphorics in From Levinas, Perverter:
*         h) Now that we have proposed an immanent hermeneutical strategy, we are bold enough to ask the broader interpretive question:  what are Levinas’s books about?  What storyline runs through his work? When we pay close attention to the etymological and the semantic networks immanent to his sentences, we notice that the same motifs crop up again and again under new transformations.[9]  Derrida gives us an insight into how metaphors develop through Levinas’s work: “Totality and Infinity … proceeds with the infinite insistence of waves on a beach:  return and repetition, always, of the same wave against the same shore, in which, however, as each return recapitulates itself, it also infinitely renews and enriches itself” (WD 312, n7). That is, Levinas’s writing, both across the span of his works and within a single text, can be understood as a process of reiterative rewriting.  Despite the fact that Totality and Infinity is broken up into a certain number of sections, chapters and subsections; and that Otherwise than Being was published 12 years after Totality and Infinity; and that Levinas’s religious work must be distinguished from his philosophical writings, I would argue that Levinas discusses one and only one thing again and again: I confront you; or, put dialogically, I converse with the Other; you say some thing to me and I listen, and then I say some thing to you and you listen. 
*         i) What animates Levinas’s corpus is that each new analysis gives us a new perspective on this singular situation.  I would in fact argue that the notion of “perspectivism” is as important for understanding Levinas’s work as it is for Nietzsche’s.[10]   Although the dialogical relation of speech surmounts the theoretical stance of vision, Levinas still retains the notion of perspective, explaining that “ethics itself is an optics” (TI 23).  He does not abandon visuality, but instead warps it, perverts it.[11]  “The differences between the Other and me … are due to the I-Other conjuncture, to the inevitable orientation of being ‘starting from oneself’ towards ‘the Other.’  The priority of this orientation over the terms that are placed in it (and which cannot arise without this orientation) summarizes the theses of the present work” (TI 215).[12] 
*         j) Once we understand the way that Levinas’s perspectives bend, we can begin to reflect upon the metaphorical networks that illuminate his work.  Most frequently, Levinas indicates the double-sidedness of a phenomenological event by reversing a perspective.  For example, to claim only that the Other is situated in an elevated state as the “Most High” is to miss the full dynamic mobilization of this metaphor.  The “height” of the other is the hyperbolic correlate and the perspectival reversal of the “the upsurge of the self (le surgisment de soi) … One becomes a subject of being … [by] an exaltation, an ‘above being’” (TI 119, TeI 123).  Keeping in mind that the French root “sur” means “over,” we can then understand why Levinas insists that we experience history as a “SURvivor” (TI 57), why infinity “SURpasses itself” (TI 103), and why fecund temporality is a “reSURrection” (TI 56).  Through a different perspectival reversal, this height of separation can also be expressed as “an abyss within enjoyment itself” (TI 141), which becomes articulated as my “hypostasis” (TO 54-55) and the Other’s “destitution” (TI 78).
* 