# An critique of "Genealogy of Morals" on Man of Ressentiment. Squinting.

 Conversely, the spectatorial tradition of rationalism posits the thinker as a judge who masters reality through his disinterested reflections.  “Ah, reason, seriousness, mastery over the affects, the whole somber thing called reflection, all the prerogatives of man:  how dearly they have been bought.”[45]  In his Genealogy of Morals, Nietzsche explains how human self-consciousness developed from a brutal history of torture.  Implicating the rational tradition in this history of violence, he asserts that cultural forces viciously repressed men’s barbarous wills in order to invent the power of self-conscious reflection.  Nietzsche mocks this notion of detached, self-reflexive thinking using the example of Kant, who “considered art and the beautiful purely from [the point of view] of the spectator. ... If [Kantian aestheticians continue to assert that] one can even view undraped female statues ‘without interest,’ one may laugh a little at their expense.”[46]  Claiming that one can not gaze at the world without being influenced one’s instincts and desires, Nietzsche argues against the notion a detached spectator.  Ultimately, the claim of pure objectivity merely demonstrates a certain evasiveness.  As Nietzsche asserts, “science today is a hiding place for every kind of ... bad conscience — it is the unrest of the lack of ideals.”[47]  According to this passage, “objectivity” merely connotes a cowardly retreat from the world.  Rather risking himself by asserting a strong will to power, the scientific thinker holes himself up within the security of his internal space.  According to Nietzsche, the insincere pretense of objectivity merely masks complacency.  By lazily sitting back and pretending to be disinterested, the contemplative spectator only demonstrates how much he fears a true engagement in the world, a powerful assertion of his will to power.  Nietzsche expresses his contempt for this disengaged attitude, saying, “such ‘spectators’ dispose me against the ‘spectacle’ more than the spectacle itself...[my foot should be] kicking to pieces these rotten armchairs, its cowardly contemplativeness.”[48] 

 

            Nietzsche associates the tradition of rational spectatorship with the man of ressentiment. [49] He remarks, “The inversion of the value positing eye — this need to direct one’s view outward instead of back to oneself — is of the essence of ressentiment:  in order to exist, slave morality always first needs a hostile external world. ... It seeks its opposite only so as to affirm itself more gratefully and triumphantly.”[50]   Like the man of ressentiment, Descartes begins his philosophical project by visually realizing that a hostile and contingent universe confronts him.  He posits an uncertain external world in order to affirm the absolute reality of his own internal viewpoint.  Nietzsche further remarks, “This type of man needs to believe in a neutral, independent ‘subject’ ... the sublime self- deception that interprets weakness as freedom.”[51]  In this statement, Nietzsche implies that the rationalist proclaims the primacy of internal subjectivity because he fears to engage the external chaos with a powerful will to power.  He therefore retreats from this confrontation by separating himself as a spectator.  In his description of the man of ressentiment, Nietzsche states that “his soul squints; his spirit loves hiding places, secret paths and back doors, everything covert entices him as his world, his security.”[52]  Like the man of ressentiment, the rationalist’s primary goal is to find security in a chaotic world.  In order to secure this safety, the philosophical spectator conceals himself in the privacy of his subjectivity, shutting out the contingency of the external world.  Furthermore, Nietzsche critiques rational ocularity by saying that the soul of the man of ressentiment “squints.”  In his effort to reduce his perspective to a single Archimedian, Albertinian point, the rational spectator must squint; Descartes must narrow his “scope.”  Although squinting generally increases the clarity and distinctness of vision, it also reduces the amount of light which the eye can receive.  Thus, in his quest for clarity and distinctness, the spectator actually obscures another more profound, perhaps more ominous, light.

 

            Nietzsche suggests that the will to power can establish certain perspectives which can enable men to assert themselves in a more healthy, more honest manner.  For example, Nietzsche states, “not that one is the first to see something, but that one sees as new what is old, long familiar, seen and overlooked by everybody, is what distinguishes truly original minds.”[53]  A strong, creative viewpoint can refashion the commonplace by willing to see it differently.  Not only does the will to power of the perceiver enable him to recreate objects according to his perspective, it also enables him to recreate himself.  Nietzsche asserts, “Most people are nothing and are considered nothing until they have dressed themselves up in general convictions and public opinions. ... Of the exceptional person, it must be said:  only he that wears it makes the costume.”[54]  The powerful man’s perspectives differentiate him from the consciousness of the unthinking masses, enabling him to refashion himself.  In Ecce Homo, Nietzsche declares that his own will to power has positioned him in an essential philosophical space.  The inquiry into morality depends upon the capacity to explore and invert viewpoints.  Nietzsche remarks, “with every increase in vitality my ability to see has also increased again. ... [I thus learned] the psychology of ‘looking around the corner.’...Now I have the power to reverse perspectives:  the first reason why a ‘revaluation of values’ is perhaps possible for me alone.”[55]  With an increase in his will to power, Nietzsche’s visual power also grew stronger.  With his new power, Nietzsche was able to look behind psychological phenomenon to discern human motivations.  Interestingly, Nietzsche does not use the common metaphor of seeing in greater depth, but talks about changing perspectival angles.  Nietzsche’s will to power does not allow him to perceive a transcendental truth, but rather enables him to shift perspectives freely.  Although Nietzsche usually emphasizes visual angle rather than visual depth, he also states that he longs for a powerful man who, with “his penetration into reality, so that, when he one day emerges again into the light, he may bring home the redemption of reality.”[56]  This statement seems to evoke the ocular models of The Birth of Tragedy.  Like the tragic artist, the powerful man will be able to penetrate beyond phenomena into the nothingness grounding reality, redeeming existence by disclosing this abyss in an Appolonian light.