            xxii)  ADDRESS THE QUESTION OF GENDER HERE : continuous transformation of masculine/feminine in process of continuous creation http://www.waste.org/~roadrunner/writing/Levinas/LevinasPerverter_20_1.htm 
*                 (1) Throughout his work, most evidently in Totality and Infinity, Levinas employs motifs of kinship to describe my connection with alterity.   When he describes the world as being "familiar to us" (TI 33), Levinas implies that experience is constituted as family members.  Through each perspective of the ethical "relationship" (TI 39) opened at each instant of the ethical genealogy, the Other figures as a different relative: the father of futural fecundity (TI 274-277), the wife of the economic home (TI 154-156), the brother of political fraternity (TI 278-280), the sister soul of incestuous Eros (TI 254), and so on.   The prevalence of these gendered family tropes has led many commentators to criticize Levinas for having a sexist and heteronormative bias.  Over half a century ago in the foundational work of modern French feminism, The Second Sex, Simone de Beauvoir accused Levinas's figuration of woman as Other to be "an assertion of masculine privilege” (xvi n3).  More recently, this protest has been expressed more angrily, with a recent article claiming that Levinas’s work articulates a “demonization of femininity and erasure of maternity” (Walsh 97).
*                 (2) For anyone who admires the work of Levinas, such anger is alarming.  Rather than reacting against this feminist standpoint, however, it is precisely our responsibility as Levinas scholars to be awakened by this alarm and to respond sincerely to this anger.  As Andrea Juno and V. Vale explain, “[Women’s] anger can spark and re-invigorate; it can bring hope and energy back into our lives and mobilize politically against the status quo” (5).  Only by rendering Levinas vulnerable, by exposing him to feminist critique, can we begin to answer for the problems in his thought and perhaps even to use these problems to develop new insights into gender and sexuality.
*                 (3) On the one hand, the feminist objection to Levinas’s language seems to be exactly correct. Without a doubt, Levinas uses gendered motifs throughout his philosophy, deploying familial structures inherited from both the Judaic and the Greek legacies of patriarchy.[1]  At all moments of our reading, this should indeed trouble us.  We should always refrain from masquerading his gendered language by replacing masculine pronouns with feminine ones, neutral ones, or even the hermaphroditic “he or she”; perhaps we should cease altogether to use “it” in our translations. We must keep in mind that Levinas articulates Humanisme de l’autre Homme, “Humanism of the Other Man,” and not, as a recent translation would have it, “Humanism of the Other.”  On the other hand, only to claim that Levinas “privileges” the masculine over the feminine overlooks the more essential question: what does “privileging” mean and should we necessarily privilege the privileged over the secondary?  
*                 (4) Derrida astutely poses this methodological problem, “We will attempt to ask several questions.  If they succeed in approaching the heart of this explication, they will be nothing less than objections but rather the questions put to us by Levinas” (WD 84).  Perhaps the words that have caused so much controversy in Levinas’s work are the very terms that he himself opens up for discussion?  Perhaps Levinas’s usage of filial tropes is not merely one of the “problems” in his view of politics (Critchley 174) but rather a problematic which must be deepened? 
*                 (5) More than any other thinker in the history of Western philosophy, Levinas stands accused in the very body of his texts, texts that “call for the critique exercised by another philosopher” (OTB 20), texts radically open to critical readings, texts that constantly require justification.  Exactly because he employs binary gendered concepts, we can use Levinas’s texts to protest for justice not just in his work but in philosophy and in Western culture itself.  Levinas has inherited sexist language and patriarchal logic from a long tradition of canonical Western thought--most of which has been written by white males[2]--that has typically figured subjectivity as virility and citizenship as fraternity. Whereas many sensible, egalitarian thinkers try to masquerade this legacy by using gender-neutral language, Levinas deliberately foregrounds the problematic of gender.  Therefore, perhaps a careful and critical reading of his texts can begin to think through the history of thought as masculine and to respond to the anger of our sisters.
* 
* 