Anarchism of the Other Person will be a rereading and rethinking of the anarchist theories (awk) through the writings of ethical phenomoenlogist Emmaneul Levinas. Its goals will be twofold: (1) to extend our conctpion of anarchism as an ethical project that informs our everyday lives; (2) to demonstrate Levinas can be read politically as an anarchist

As there are many different traditions to anarchism, ours will be in the lineage of anarchocommunism, focusing particularly on the writings of Petr Kropotkin, whose pamphlets inspired Russian revolutionaries to overthrow Czar Nicolas II and Ricaro Flores Magon, whose journalism inspired Mexican revolutionaries to overthrow dictator Porfirio Diaz. We will also bring in the writings of bell hooks, Lucy Parsons, Lynne Farrow, William C. Anderson, Aragorn!, ZigZag, and Klee Benally.

The task of articulating such an anarchism of the other person, ethical project of anarchocomunism read through the ethical philosophy of Emmanuel Levinas, seems especially urgent because so much anarchist thought -- from Emma Goldman to Hakim Bey -- is influenced by the critique of morality propounded by Friedrich Nietsche and his precursor Max Stirner and inheritors such as Martin Heidegger and Gilles Deleuze. I will argue that, while such thinking can be useful for smashing the rigid heirarchy of domination, such thought derives ultimately from Heraclitus, who argued that struggle (_polemos_) was the root of all things. This reification of struggle is a spiritual grounding for a thinker like THomas Hobbes, who sees the struggle of all against all as the ground for the authoritarianism of the political -- not just the authoritarian state but the understanding of sociality in terms of violence. This same polemos is illustrative of the thinking in terms of mechanism impulse and desire.

This is understanding Becoming as a metabolism of Being. This same Heraclitean belief is influential in its admixture with the mechanistic theory of Hobbes, who sees things as merely colliding with each other and driven by anonymous desires and other mechanical forces that flow through us

Levinas, Kropotkin, and Sarah Hrdy can give us an understanding of the Becoming of Being not only in terms of metabolism but also as birthing, as the generation of generations, a continuous creation.
