# Subversions
## Anarchism of the Other Person

Introduction
============
Levinas Antifascist Jew writing against Heraclitus in 1934.  Against the concordat made by the pope, an alliance between religion and state key to fascist takeover


Heraclitus
==========
* Introduction to Metaphysics
> enemies. In particular, in his elucidation of a famous choral ode in Sophocles’ Antigone, Heidegger explores the idea that human beings, or at least the great and creative ones, are uncanny and violent: they must fight against other beings and against Being itself until they are tragically crushed by Being’s overwhelming power. Is

> 115), he seems to want to underline the radically transformative work of the Gewalt-tat and the Gewalt-tätiger, the act of violence and the doer of violence, without minimizing the danger and even the terror of such work. The root of Gewalt is walten, which we translate as “hold sway,” or in its noun form as “sway”; walten might also be rendered as “prevail,” “reign,” “govern,” or “dominate.” The sway is not simply a human affair, but a characteristic of phusis itself—the powerful upsurge of the presence of beings.13 Likewise, Heraclitean polemos or “war” may lie at the root of human warfare, but it is also a deeper, ontological confrontation that affects the very process of meaning and disclosure.14

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 194-200). Kindle Edition. 


> meaning). Throughout the mid-thirties, Heidegger appears to celebrate creative conflict; he seems to believe that National Socialism may find an appropriate way to spur such creativity and to revive an ancient understanding of technē as a forceful and disclosive struggle. But with his turn away from power and will, and his developing critique of modern technology, Heidegger develops a less violent understanding of what constitutes human greatness, as is evident when he returns to Antigone in a lecture course of 1942.15

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 203-207). Kindle Edition. 

aim. This readily gives the impression that philosophy can and must provide a foundation for the current and future historical Dasein of a people in every age, a foundation for building culture. But such expectations

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 822-823). Kindle Edition. 

Against this first misinterpretation, what philosophy can and must be according to its essence, is this: a thoughtful opening of the avenues and vistas of a knowing that establishes measure and rank, a knowing in which and from which a people conceives its Dasein in the historical-spiritual world and brings it to fulfillment—that knowing which ignites and threatens and compels all questioning and appraising.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 830-832). Kindle Edition. 

We use the Latin translation natura, which really means “to be born,” “birth.” But with this Latin translation, the original content of the Greek word phusis is already thrust aside, the authentic philosophical naming power of the Greek word is destroyed. This is true not only of the Latin translation of this word, but of all other translations of Greek philosophical language into Roman. This translation of Greek into Roman was not an arbitrary and innocuous process, but was the first stage in the isolation and alienation of the originary essence of Greek philosophy.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 874-878). Kindle Edition. 


includes both “becoming” as well as “Being” in the narrower sense of fixed continuity. Phusis is the event of standing forth, arising from the concealed and thus enabling the concealed to take its stand for the first time.12

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 898-900). Kindle Edition. 

disposition. For this consists in a willing-to-know. Willing—this is not just wishing and trying. Whoever wishes to know also seems to question; but he does not get beyond saying the question, he stops short precisely where the question begins. Questioning is willing-to-know. Whoever wills, whoever puts his whole Dasein into a will, is resolute. Resoluteness delays nothing, does not shirk, but acts from the moment and without fail. Open resoluteness is no mere resolution to act; it is the decisive inception of action that reaches ahead of and through all action. To will is to be resolute. [The essence of willing is traced back here to open resoluteness. But the essence of open resoluteness <Ent-schlossenheit> lies in the de-concealment <Ent-borgenheit> of human Dasein for the clearing of Being and by no means in an accumulation of energy for “activity.” Cf. Being and Time, §44 and §60. But the relation to Being is letting. That all willing should be grounded in letting strikes the understanding as strange. See the lecture “On the Essence of Truth,” 1930.]19

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 987-996). Kindle Edition. 

A state—it is. What does its Being consist in? In the fact that the state police arrest a suspect, or that in a ministry of the Reich so and so many typewriters clatter away and record the dictation of state secretaries and ministers? Or “is” the state in the discussion between the Führer and the English foreign minister? The state is. But where is Being to be found? Is it located anywhere at all?

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 1196-1199). Kindle Edition. 

This Europe, in its unholy blindness always on the point of cutting its own throat, lies today in the great pincers between Russia on the one side and America on the other. Russia and America, seen metaphysically, are both the same: the same hopeless frenzy of unchained technology and of the rootless organization of the average man. When the farthest corner of the globe has been conquered technically and can be exploited economically; when any incident you like, in any place you like, at any time you like, becomes accessible as fast as you like; when you can simultaneously “experience” an assassination attempt against a king in France29 and a symphony

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 1233-1238). Kindle Edition. 


still lack the essential insight into how far this asking of the question of Being, an asking which is in itself historical, intrinsically belongs to the world history of the earth. We said: on the earth, all over it, a darkening of the world is happening. The essential happenings in this darkening are: the flight of the gods, the destruction of the earth, the reduction of human beings to a mass, the preeminence of the mediocre.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 1342-1345). Kindle Edition. 

Typical bullshit assessment of the social 

insights. Dasein began to slide into a world that lacked that depth from which the essential always comes and returns to human beings, thereby forcing them to superiority and allowing them to act on the basis of rank. All things sank to the same level, to a surface resembling a blind mirror that no longer mirrors, that casts nothing back. The prevailing dimension became that of extension and number. To be able—this no longer means to spend and to lavish, thanks to lofty overabundance and the mastery of energies; instead, it means only practicing a routine in which anyone can be trained, always combined with a certain amount of sweat and display. In America and Russia, then, this all intensified until it turned into the measureless so-on-and-so-forth of the ever identical and the indifferent, until finally this quantitative temper became a quality of its own. By now in those countries the predominance of a cross section of the indifferent is no longer something inconsequential and merely barren, but is the onslaught of that which aggressively destroys all rank and all that is world-spiritual, and portrays these as a lie. This is the onslaught of what we call the demonic [in the sense of the destructively evil].34 There

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 1356-1365). Kindle Edition. 

1. One decisive aspect is the reinterpretation of spirit as intelligence, and this as mere cleverness in the examination, calculation, and observation of given things, their possible modification, and their additional elaboration. This cleverness is a matter of mere talent and practice and mass distribution. This cleverness is itself subject to the possibility of organization, none of which ever applies to the spirit. The whole phenomenon of literati and aesthetes is just a late consequence and mutation of the spirit falsified as intelligence. Mere ingenuity is the semblance of spirit and veils its absence.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 1367-1372). Kindle Edition. 

“Phusis ist das Ent-stehen, aus dem Verborgenen sich heraus- und dieses so erst in den Stand bringen.” Heidegger is playing on the etymological connection between Entstehen (genesis, growth) and Stand (a stand, state, situation, condition). The phrase in den Stand bringen ordinarily means to enable.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 1462-1464). Kindle Edition. 

The grammatical analysis of words is neither exclusively nor primarily concerned with their written or spoken form. It takes these formal elements as clues to definite directions and differences in direction in the possible meanings of words; these directions dictate how the words can be used within a sentence or within a larger discursive structure. The words: he goes, we went, they have gone, go!, going, to go—these are inflections of the same word according to definite directions of meaning.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 1532-1536). Kindle Edition. 

significant. The textbooks of the Greek and Latin grammarians were schoolbooks in the West for over a thousand years. We know that these were anything but weak and petty times.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 1621-1622). Kindle Edition. 

reich

The terms ptōsis and enklisis mean a falling, tipping, or inclining. This implies a dropping-off from an upright, straight stance. But this standing-there, this taking and maintaining a stand that stands erected high in itself, is what the Greeks understood as Being. Whatever takes such a stand becomes constant in itself and thereby freely and on its own runs up against the necessity of its limit, peras. This peras is not something that first accrues to a being from outside. Much less is it some deficiency in the sense of a detrimental restriction. Instead, the self-restraining hold that comes from a limit, the having-of-itself wherein the constant holds itself, is the Being of beings; it is what first makes a being be a being as opposed to a nonbeing. For something

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 1640-1645). Kindle Edition. 


be. This is the key to understanding the highest term that Aristotle used for Being: entelecheia, something’s holding-(or maintaining)-itself-in-its-completion-(or limit). What was done with the term “entelechy” by later philosophy (cf. Leibniz), not to mention biology, demonstrates the full extent of the decline from what is Greek. Whatever places itself into and thereby enacts its limit,3 and thus stands, has shape, morphē. The essence of shape, as understood by the Greeks, comes from the emergent placing-itself-forth-into-the-limit. But from an observer’s point of view, what stands-there-in-itself becomes what puts itself forth, what offers itself in how it looks. The Greeks call the look of a thing its eidos or idea. Initially,

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 1649-1655). Kindle Edition. 

entirely: phusis means the emergent self-upraising, the self-unfolding that abides in itself. In this sway, rest and movement are closed and opened up from an originary unity. This sway is the overwhelming coming-to-presence that has not yet been conquered in thinking, and within which that which comes to presence essentially unfolds as beings. But this sway first steps forth from concealment, that is, in Greek, alētheia (unconcealment) happens, insofar as the sway struggles itself forth as a world. Through world, beings first come into being. Heraclitus says (fragment 53): πόλεμος πάντων μὲν πατήρ ἐστι,
πάντων δὲ βασιλεύς, καὶ τoὺς μὲν θεοὺς ἔδειξε τοὺς δὲ ἀνθρώπους, τοὺς μὲν δούλους ἐποίησε τοὺς δὲ ἐλευθέρους. Confrontation is indeed for all (that comes to presence) the sire (who lets emerge), but (also) for all the preserver that holds sway. For it lets some appear as gods, others as human beings, some it produces (sets forth) as slaves, but others as the free.4 The polemos named here is a strife that holds sway before everything divine and human, not war in the human sense. As Heraclitus thinks it, struggle first and foremost allows what essentially unfolds to step apart from each other in opposition, first allows position and status and rank to establish themselves in coming to presence. In such a stepping apart, clefts, intervals, distances and joints open themselves up. In con-frontation, world comes to be. [Confrontation does not divide unity, much less destroy it. It builds unity; it is the gathering (logos). Polemos and logos are the same.]5 {48} The struggle meant here is originary struggle, for it allows those that struggle to originate as such in the first place; it is not a mere assault on the present-at-hand. Struggle first projects and develops the un-heard of, the hitherto un-said and un-thought. This struggle is then sustained by the creators, by the poets, thinkers, and statesmen. Against the overwhelming sway, they throw the counterweight of their work and capture in this work the world that is thereby opened up. With these works, the sway, phusis, first comes to a stand in what comes to presence. Beings as such now first come into being. This becoming-a-world is authentic history. Struggle as such not only allows for arising and standing-forth; it alone also preserves beings in their constancy. Where struggle ceases, beings indeed do not disappear, but world turns away. Beings are no longer asserted [that is, preserved as such].6 Beings now become just something one comes across; they are findings. What is completed is no longer that which is pressed into limits [that is, set into its shape],7 but is now merely what is finished and as such is at the disposal of just anybody, the present-at-hand, in which no world is worlding any more—instead, human beings now steer and hold sway with whatever is at their disposal. Beings become objects, whether for observing (view, picture) or for making, as the fabricated, the object of calculation. That which originally holds sway,8 phusis, now degenerates into a prototype for reproduction and copying. Nature now becomes a special domain, as distinguished from art and from everything that can be produced and regulated according to a plan. The originally emergent self-upraising of the violent forces of what holds sway, the phainesthai as appearing in the broad sense of the epiphany of a world, now becomes reduced to the demonstrable visibility of present-at-hand things. The eye, the seeing, which once viewed the project into the sway in an originary viewing, and pro-duced the work while seeing into the sway, has now been reduced to mere observing and inspecting and staring. The look is now only the optical. (Schopenhauer’s “world eye”—pure cognition . . .)9

A more conventional translation of the fragment might be: “War is the father of all and the king of all, and it has shown some as gods and others as human beings, made some slaves and others free.” Heidegger cites the pre-Socratics by their Diels-Kranz fragment numbers.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 1881-1883). Kindle Edition. 

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 1684-1697). Kindle Edition. 

language. The meaning of the words ptōsis and enklisis presupposes the notion of an upright stand. We said that language, too, is conceived by the Greeks as something in being and thereby as something in keeping with the sense of their understanding of Being. What is in being is

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 1712-1714). Kindle Edition. 

experience the spatial according to extensio, but instead according to place (topos) as chōra, which means neither place nor space, but what is taken up and occupied by what stands there. The place belongs to the thing itself.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 1739-1741). Kindle Edition. 



2. The other Indo-Germanic root is bhū, bheu. To this belongs the Greek phuō, to emerge, to hold sway, to come to a stand from out of itself and to remain standing. Until now, bhū has been interpreted according to the usual superficial conception of phusis and phuein as nature and as “growing.” According to the more original interpretation, which stems from the confrontation with the inception of Greek philosophy, this “growing” proves to be an emerging which in turn is determined by coming to presence and appearing. Recently, the radical phu-has been connected with pha-, phainesthai <to show itself>. Phusis would then be that which emerges into the light, phuein, to illuminate, to shine forth and therefore to appear. (See Zeitschrift für vergleichende Sprachforschung, vol. 59.)14

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 1826-1832). Kindle Edition. 

have that evanescent meaning, then there would not be any single word at all. We ourselves could never be those who say. We would never be able to be those who we are. For to be human means to be a sayer. Human beings are yes- and no-sayers only because they are, in the ground of their essence, sayers, the sayers. That is their distinction and also their predicament. It distinguishes them from stones, plants, and animals, but also from the gods. Even if we had a thousand eyes and a thousand ears, a thousand hands, and many other senses and organs, if our essence did not stand within the power of language, then all beings would remain closed off to us—the beings that we ourselves are, no less than the beings that we are not.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2009-2014). Kindle Edition. 

Only insofar as we deem this preeminence Vorrang of the understanding of Being worthy in its own rank Rang do we preserve this preeminence as rank. In what way can we deem this rank worthy, preserve it in its worth? This we cannot decide arbitrarily.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2022-2023). Kindle Edition. 

“Over all the peaks / is peace”: the “is” simply cannot be paraphrased, and yet it is merely this “is,” as it was said in passing in those few verses that Goethe wrote in pencil on the window frame of a hut on the Kickelhahn near Ilmenau (see the letter to Zelter of September 4, 1831).7 Strange how we waver here with our paraphrase, hesitate, and finally just let it go, not because this is too complicated and hard to understand, but because the verse is said so simply, even more simply and uniquely than any other, ordinary “is” that mixes itself inconspicuously and constantly into everyday saying and talking.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2127-2132). Kindle Edition. 

The question, “How does it stand with Being?” must maintain itself within the history of Being if it is, in turn, to unfold and preserve its own historical import. In pursuing it, we will once again focus on the saying of Being.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2166-2167). Kindle Edition. 

ruddick preserve

The fourth distinction (Being and the ought) belongs thoroughly to modernity; it is prefigured only distantly by the characterization of on <being, what is> as agathon <good>. Since the end of the eighteenth century, it has determined one of the predominant positions of the modern spirit toward beings in general.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2208-2210). Kindle Edition. 

commensurate with Being. It has another measure. We conclude from all this that Being indicates itself to this saying as the proper, self-collected perdurance of the constant, undisturbed by restlessness and change. Even today, in accounts of the inception of Western philosophy, it is customary to oppose Parmenides’s teaching to that of Heraclitus. An oft-cited saying supposedly derives from Heraclitus: panta rhei, all is in flux. Hence there is no Being. All “is” becoming.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2241-2245). Kindle Edition. 

If we pay attention to what has been said, then we will discover the inner connection between Being and seeming. But we can grasp this connection fully only if we understand “Being” in a correspondingly original way, and here this means in a Greek way. We know that Being opens itself up to the Greeks as phusis. The emerging-abiding sway is in If we pay attention to what has been said, then we will discover the inner connection between Being and seeming. But we can grasp this connection fully only if we understand “Being” in a correspondingly original way, and here this means in a Greek way. We know that Being opens itself up to the Greeks as phusis. The emerging-abiding sway is in

If we pay attention to what has been said, then we will discover the inner connection between Being and seeming. But we can grasp this connection fully only if we understand “Being” in a correspondingly original way, and here this means in a Greek way. We know that Being opens itself up to the Greeks as phusis. The emerging-abiding sway is in

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2297-2300). Kindle Edition. 

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2297-2300). Kindle Edition. 

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2297-2300). Kindle Edition. 

Truth belongs to the essence of Being. To be a being—this implies to be made manifest, to step forth in appearing, to set itself forth, to pro-duce something <sich hin-stellen, etwas her-stellen>. Not-Being, in contrast, means to step away from appearance, from presence. The essence of appearance involves this stepping-forth and stepping-away, this hither and hence in the genuinely demonstrative, indicative sense. Being is thus dispersed into the manifold beings. These display themselves here, there, and everywhere as what is close by in each instance. As what appears, what is gives itself an aspect, dokei.6 Doxa means aspect, namely, the respect in which one stands. If the aspect, corresponding to what emerges in it, is an eminent one, then doxa means brilliance and glory. In Hellenistic theology and in the New Testament, doxa theou, gloria Dei, is the majesty of God. To glorify, to bestow and demonstrate regard, is, in Greek, to place into the light and thereby to provide constancy, Being. Glory, for the Greeks, is not something additional that someone may or may not receive; it is the highest manner of Being. For us today, glory has long been nothing but celebrity, and as such it is a highly dubious matter, an acquisition thrown around and distributed by the newspaper and the radio—nearly the opposite of Being. If for Pindar glorifying constitutes the essence of poetry and is poetizing, and to poetize is to place into the light, then this by no means indicates that for him the concept of light plays a special role, but simply that he thinks and poetizes as a Greek, that is, he stands in the allotted essence of Being.

We needed to show that and how, for the Greeks, appearing belongs to Being, or, more sharply stated: that and how Being has its essence together with appearing. This was clarified through the highest possibility of human Being, as the Greeks formed it, through glory and glorifying. Glory means doxa. Dokeō means: I show myself, I appear, I step into the light. What is experienced here mainly in terms of vision and the visage, the respect in which someone stands, is grasped more in terms of hearing and calling <Rufen> by the other word for glory: kleos. Glory is the repute <Ruf> in which one stands. Heraclitus says (fragment 29): αἱρεῦνται γὰρ ἓν ἀντὶ ἁπάντων οἱ ἄριστοι, κλέοϛ ἀέναον θνητῶν, οἱ δὲ πολλοὶ κεκόρηνται ὅκωσπερ κτήνεα: “for the noblest choose one thing above all others: glory, which constantly persists, in contrast to what dies; but the many are sated like cattle.” But there is a restriction that pertains to all this, one that at the same time shows the state of affairs in its essential fullness. Doxa is the respect <Ansehen> in which someone stands, and in a wider sense, the aspect <Ansehen> that each being harbors and displays in its look <Aussehen> (eidos, idea). A city offers a grand vista. The view that a being has in itself, and so first can offer from itself, lets itself then be apprehended at this or that time, from this or that viewpoint. The vista that offers itself alters with each new viewpoint. Thus, this view is also one that we take and make for ourselves. In experiencing and busying ourselves with beings, we constantly construct views for ourselves from


We needed to show that and how, for the Greeks, appearing belongs to Being, or, more sharply stated: that and how Being has its essence together with appearing. This was clarified through the highest possibility of human Being, as the Greeks formed it, through glory and glorifying. Glory means doxa. Dokeō means: I show myself, I appear, I step into the light. What is experienced here mainly in terms of vision and the visage, the respect in which someone stands, is grasped more in terms of hearing and calling <Rufen> by the other word for glory: kleos. Glory is the repute <Ruf> in which one stands. Heraclitus says (fragment 29): αἱρεῦνται γὰρ ἓν ἀντὶ ἁπάντων οἱ ἄριστοι, κλέοϛ ἀέναον θνητῶν, οἱ δὲ πολλοὶ κεκόρηνται ὅκωσπερ κτήνεα: “for the noblest choose one thing above all others: glory, which constantly persists, in contrast to what dies; but the many are sated like cattle.” But there is a restriction that pertains to all this, one that at the same time shows the state of affairs in its essential fullness. Doxa is the respect <Ansehen> in which someone stands, and in a wider sense, the aspect <Ansehen> that each being harbors and displays in its look <Aussehen> (eidos, idea). A city offers a grand vista. The view that a being has in itself, and so first can offer from itself, lets itself then be apprehended at this or that time, from this or that viewpoint. The vista that offers itself alters with each new viewpoint. Thus, this view is also one that we take and make for ourselves. In experiencing and busying ourselves with beings, we constantly construct views for ourselves from


We have now reached our goal. Because Being, phusis, consists in appearing, in the offering of a look and of views, it stands essentially, and thus necessarily and constantly, in the possibility of a look that precisely covers over and conceals what beings are in truth, that is, in unconcealment. This aspect in which beings now come to stand is seeming in the sense of semblance. Wherever there is unconcealment of beings, there is the possibility of seeming, and conversely: wherever beings stand in seeming, and take a prolonged and secure stand there, seeming can break apart and fall away. {80} The term doxa names various things: 1) aspect, or respect, as glory; 2) aspect as the sheer view that something offers; 3) aspect as merely looking-so, “seeming” as mere semblance; 4) a view that a person constructs for himself, opinion. This


Only all the effete latecomers, with their overly clever wit, believe they can be done with the historical power of seeming by explaining it as “subjective,” where the essence of this “subjectivity” is something extremely dubious. The Greeks experienced it otherwise. Time and again, they had first to tear Being away from seeming and preserve it against seeming. [Being essentially unfolds from un-concealment.]8 Only by undergoing the struggle between Being and seeming did they wrest Being forth from beings, did they bring beings into constancy and unconcealment: the gods and the state, the temples and the tragedies,


Only all the effete latecomers, with their overly clever wit, believe they can be done with the historical power of seeming by explaining it as “subjective,” where the essence of this “subjectivity” is something extremely dubious. The Greeks experienced it otherwise. Time and again, they had first to tear Being away from seeming and preserve it against seeming. [Being essentially unfolds from un-concealment.]8 Only by undergoing the struggle between Being and seeming did they wrest Being forth from beings, did they bring beings into constancy and unconcealment: the gods and the state, the temples and the tragedies,

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2370-2375). Kindle Edition. 

Only all the effete latecomers, with their overly clever wit, believe they can be done with the historical power of seeming by explaining it as “subjective,” where the essence of this “subjectivity” is something extremely dubious. The Greeks experienced it otherwise. Time and again, they had first to tear Being away from seeming and preserve it against seeming. [Being essentially unfolds from un-concealment.]8 Only by undergoing the struggle between Being and seeming did they wrest Being forth from beings, did they bring beings into constancy and unconcealment: the gods and the state, the temples and the tragedies,

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2370-2375). Kindle Edition. 

So the man who truly knows is not the one who blindly runs after a truth, but only the one who constantly knows all three ways, that of Being, that of not-Being, and that of seeming. Superior knowing—and all knowing is superiority—is granted only to one who has experienced the sweeping storm on the way of Being, to whom the terror of the second way to the abyss of Nothing has not remained foreign, and who has still taken over the third way, the way of seeming, as a constant and urgent need.


tolma: to dare everything with Being, not-Being, and seeming all at once, that is, to raise Dasein above itself into the de-cision about Being, not-Being, and seeming. On the basis of this fundamental orientation to Being, one of their greatest poets, Pindar (Nemean Ode III, 70), says: en de peira telos dia-phainetai: in the daring test in the midst of beings, fulfillment makes itself manifest, the delimitation of what has been brought to stand and has come to stand, that is, Being.20 Here speaks the same fundamental orientation that shines forth from the saying of Heraclitus we have cited about polemos <fragment 53>. Con-frontation, that is, not mere quarreling and feuding but the strife of the striving, sets the essential and the unessential, the high and the low, into their limits and makes them manifest. What is an inexhaustible source of wonder is not only the mature sureness of this fundamental orientation to Being, but also the richness of its formation in word and stone.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2507-2515). Kindle Edition. 

CONFRONTATION VS FACE-TO-FACE

In the inceptive disclosure of the Being of beings, then, becoming, as well as seeming, must be opposed to Being. Yet becoming as “arising” nevertheless belongs to phusis. If we understand both in a Greek manner, becoming as coming-into-presence and going-away out of presence, Being as emergent and appearing coming to presence, not-Being as absence, then the reciprocal relation between emerging and waning is appearance, Being itself. Just as becoming is the seeming of Being, seeming as appearing is the becoming of Being.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2528-2532). Kindle Edition. 

off to us in what it is, unless we already know about something like time, reckoning with time, measuring time. Our viewpoint’s line of sight must already be laid out in advance. We call this prior line of sight “perspective.” Thus, it will become clear not only that Being is not understood in an indeterminate way, but that the determinate understanding of Being itself moves within a prior line of sight that has already been determined.


Keeping all this firmly in view, we say: Being as phusis is the emerging sway. In opposition to becoming, it shows itself as constancy, constant presence. This presence announces itself in opposition to seeming as appearing, as manifest presence. What does logos (gathering) have to do with Being as so interpreted? But first we must ask: Is there any evidence for such a connection between Being and logos in the inception of Greek philosophy? By all means. Once again, we will rely on the two definitive thinkers Parmenides and Heraclitus, and we will try once again to find entry into the Greek world, whose basic traits, though distorted and repressed, displaced and covered up, still sustain our own world. Again and again we must emphasize that precisely because we dare to take up the great and lengthy task of tearing down a world that has grown old and of building it truly anew, that is, historically, we must know the tradition. We must know more—that is, we must know in a more rigorous and compelling way—than all earlier ages and upheavals before us. Only the most radical historical knowledge brings us face to face with the unfamiliarity of our tasks and preserves us from a new onset of mere restoration and uncreative imitation. We will begin to demonstrate the inner connection between logos and phusis in the inception of Western philosophy with an interpretation of Heraclitus.

Among the most ancient Greek thinkers, it is Heraclitus who was subjected to the most fundamentally un-Greek misinterpretation in the course of Western history, and who nevertheless in more recent times has provided the strongest impulses toward redisclosing what is authentically Greek. Each of the two friends Hegel and Hölderlin stands under the great and fruitful spell of Heraclitus in his own way, with the difference that Hegel looks backward and closes off, while Hölderlin gazes forward and opens up. Nietzsche has yet another Heraclitus. To be sure, Nietzsche fell prey to the commonplace and untrue opposition of Parmenides to Heraclitus. This is one of the essential reasons why his metaphysics never found its way to the decisive question, although Nietzsche did reconceive the great age of the inception of Greek Dasein in its entirety in a way that is surpassed only by Hölderlin. But it was Christianity that first misinterpreted Heraclitus.


It is said of logos: 1) constancy, lasting, is proper to it; 2) it essentially unfolds as the Together in beings, the Together of the being, that which gathers; 3) everything that happens, that is, that comes into Being, stands there in accordance with this constant Together; this is what holds sway. What is said of logos here corresponds exactly to the authentic meaning of the word “gathering.” But just as this word denotes both 1) to gather and 2) gatheredness, logos here means the gathering gatheredness, that which originally gathers. Logos here does not mean sense, or word, or doctrine, and certainly not “the sense of a doctrine,” but instead, the originally gathering gatheredness that constantly holds sway in itself.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2726-2731). Kindle Edition. 


CONFRONTATION
discipline. The gathering together of the highest opposed striving is polemos, struggle in the sense of the confrontation, the setting-apart-from-each-other <Aus-einander-setzung> that we have discussed. In contrast, for us today, the beautiful is the relaxing, what is restful and thus intended


2. Being as logos is originary gathering, not a heap or pile where everything counts just as much and just as little—and for this reason, rank and dominance belong to Being. If Being is to open itself up, it itself must have rank and maintain it. Heraclitus’s reference to the many as dogs and donkeys is characteristic of this attitude, one that belongs essentially to Greek Dasein. If people today from time to time are going to busy themselves rather too eagerly with the polis of the Greeks, they should not suppress this side of it; otherwise the concept of the polis

easily becomes innocuous and sentimental. What is higher in rank is what is stronger. Thus Being, logos, as the gathered harmony, is not easily available for everyman at the same price, but is concealed, as opposed to that harmony which is always a mere equalizing, the elimination of tension, leveling: ἁρμονίη ἀφανὴϛ φανερῆϛ κρείττων, “the harmony that does not show itself (immediately and without further ado) is more powerful than the harmony that is (always) evident” (fragment 54). Because Being is logos, harmonia, alētheia, phusis, phainesthai <logos, harmony, unconcealment, phusis, self-showing>, it shows itself in a way that is anything but arbitrary. The true is not for everyman, but only for the strong. It is with a view to this inner superiority and concealment of Being that Heraclitus speaks that strange saying which, precisely because it seems to be so un-Greek, testifies to the essence of the Greek experience of the Being of beings: ἀλλ’ ὥσπερ σάρμα εἰκῆ κεχυμένων ὁ κάλλιστοϛ κόσμοϛ, “the most beautiful world is like a dungheap, cast down in shambles” (fragment 124). Sarma is the opposing concept to logos, what is merely cast down as opposed to what stands in itself, the heap as opposed to collectedness, un-Being as opposed to Being. The ordinary version of the philosophy of Heraclitus likes to sum it up in the saying panta rhei, “everything flows.” If this saying stems from Heraclitus at all, then it does not mean that everything is mere change that runs on and runs astray, pure inconstancy, but instead it means: the whole of beings in its Being is always thrown from one opposite to the easily becomes innocuous and sentimental. What is higher in rank is what is stronger. Thus Being, logos, as the gathered harmony, is not easily available for everyman at the same price, but is concealed, as opposed to that harmony which is always a mere equalizing, the elimination of tension, leveling: ἁρμονίη ἀφανὴϛ φανερῆϛ κρείττων, “the harmony that does not show itself (immediately and without further ado) is more powerful than the harmony that is (always) evident” (fragment 54). Because Being is logos, harmonia, alētheia, phusis, phainesthai <logos, harmony, unconcealment, phusis, self-showing>, it shows itself in a way that is anything but arbitrary. The true is not for everyman, but only for the strong. It is with a view to this inner superiority and concealment of Being that Heraclitus speaks that strange saying which, precisely because it seems to be so un-Greek, testifies to the essence of the Greek experience of the Being of beings: ἀλλ’ ὥσπερ σάρμα εἰκῆ κεχυμένων ὁ κάλλιστοϛ κόσμοϛ, “the most beautiful world is like a dungheap, cast down in shambles” (fragment 124). Sarma is the opposing concept to logos, what is merely cast down as opposed to what stands in itself, the heap as opposed to collectedness, un-Being as opposed to Being. The ordinary version of the philosophy of Heraclitus likes to sum it up in the saying panta rhei, “everything flows.” If this saying stems from Heraclitus at all, then it does not mean that everything is mere change that runs on and runs astray, pure inconstancy, but instead it means: the whole of beings in its Being is always thrown from one opposite to the

other, thrown over here and over there—Being is the gatheredness of this conflicting unrest. If we comprehend the fundamental meaning of logos as gathering and gatheredness, we must firmly establish and firmly hold to the following: Gathering is never just driving together and piling up. It maintains in a belonging-together that which contends and strives in confrontation. It does not allow it to decay into mere dispersion and what is simply cast down. As maintaining, logos has the character of pervasive sway, of phusis. It does not dissolve what it pervades into an empty lack of opposites; instead, by unifying what contends, the gathering maintains it in the highest acuteness of its tension. {103} This is the place to return briefly to the question of the Christian concept of logos, particularly that of the New Testament. For a more precise account we would have to distinguish here between the synoptic gospels and the Gospel of John. But in principle we can say: in the New Testament, from the start, logos does not mean, as in Heraclitus, the Being of beings, the gatheredness of what strives in opposition, but logos means one particular being, namely the Son of God. Furthermore, it means Him in the role of mediator between God and humanity. This New Testament representation of logos is that of the Jewish philosophy of religion which was developed by Philo, in whose doctrine of creation logos is determined as the mesitēs, the mediator. Why is the mediator

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2828-2840). Kindle Edition. 

accordance with the essence of Being. Who the human being is, according to the word of Heraclitus, first comes forth (edeixe, shows itself) in the polemos, in the disjunction of gods and human beings, in the happening of the irruption of Being itself.44 Who the human being is—for philosophy, the answer to this

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2924-2927). Kindle Edition. 

Apprehending is not a way of behaving that the human being has as a property; to the contrary, apprehending is the happening that has the human being. Thus, Parmenides always simply speaks only of noein, apprehending. What is fulfilled in this saying is nothing less than the knowing entrance-into-appearance of the human being as historical (preserver of Being).47

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2945-2948). Kindle Edition. 

What Parmenides’s saying expresses is a determination of the human essence on the basis of the essence of Being itself. But we still do not know how the human essence is determined here. So far, we have simply delineated the space into which the saying speaks, and which it first helps to open up by speaking into it. Yet this general indication is still not enough to set us free from the usual representations of humanity and from the typical manner in which it has been determined conceptually. In order to understand the saying and to grasp its truth, we must at least have an intimation of something positive about Greek Dasein and Being. From the saying of Heraclitus that we have cited several times,49 we know that the disjunction of gods and humans happens only in polemos, in the confrontational setting-asunder <Aus-einander-setzung> (of Being). Only such struggle edeixe, points out. It lets gods and human beings step forth in their Being. Who is the human being—we do not learn this through a scholarly definition, but only when humanity steps into the confrontation with beings, by attempting to bring them into their Being, that is, sets beings into limits and form, projects something new (not yet present), originally poetizes, grounds poetically.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2988-2997). Kindle Edition. 

Manifold is the uncanny, yet nothing uncannier than man bestirs itself, rising up beyond him. He fares forth upon the foaming tide amid winter’s southerly tempest and cruises through the summits of the raging, clefted swells. The noblest of gods as well, the earth, the indestructibly untiring, he wearies, overturning her from year to year, driving the plows this way and that with his steeds. Even the lightly gliding flock of birds he snares, and he hunts the beast folk of the wilderness and the brood whose home is the sea, the man who studies wherever he goes. With ruses he overwhelms the beast that spends its nights on mountains and roams, and clasping with wood the rough-maned neck of the steed and the unvanquished bull he forces them into the yoke. {113} Into the sounding of the word, as well, and into wind-swift all-understanding he found his way, and into the mettle to rule over cities. He has considered, too, how he might flee exposure to the arrows of unpropitious weather and its frosts. Everywhere trying out, underway; untried, with no way out he comes to Nothing.52 A single onslaught, death, he was unable ever to resist by any flight, even if in the face of dire illness deft escape should be granted him. Clever indeed, for he masters skill’s devices beyond expectation, now he falls prey to wickedness, yet again valor succeeds for him. Between the ordinance of the earth and the gods’ sworn fittingness he fares. Rising high over the site, losing the site is he for whom what is not, is, always, for the sake of daring.53 Let him not become a companion at my hearth, nor let my knowing share the delusions of the one who works such deeds.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3055-3066). Kindle Edition. 

either].54 The human being is to deinotaton, the uncanniest of the uncanny. The Greek word deinon and our translation call for an advance explication here. This explication is to be given only on the basis of the unspoken prior view of the entire ode, which itself supplies the only adequate interpretation of the first two verses. The Greek word deinon has that uncanny ambiguity with which the saying of the Greeks traverses the opposed con-frontations of Being. {115} On the one hand, deinon names the terrible, but it does not apply to petty terrors, and does not have the degenerate, childish, and useless meaning that we give the word today when we call something “terribly cute.” The deinon is the terrible in the sense of the overwhelming sway, which induces panicked fear, true anxiety, as well as collected, inwardly reverberating, reticent awe. The violent, the overwhelming is the essential character of the sway itself.55 When the sway breaks in, it can keep its overwhelming power to itself. But this does not make it more harmless, but only more terrible and distant. But on the other hand, deinon means the violent in the sense of one who needs to use violence—and does not just have violence at his

disposal, but is violence-doing, insofar as using violence is the basic trait not just of his doing, but of his Dasein. Here we are giving the expression “doing violence” an essential sense that in principle reaches beyond the usual meaning of the expression, which generally means nothing but brutality and arbitrariness. Violence is usually seen in terms of the domain in which concurring compromise and mutual assistance set the standard for Dasein, and accordingly all violence is necessarily deemed only a disturbance and offense. Beings as a whole, as the sway, are the overwhelming, deinon in the first sense. But humanity is deinon, first, inasmuch as it remains exposed to this overwhelming sway, because it essentially belongs to Being. However, humanity is also deinon because it is violence-doing in the sense we have indicated. [It gathers what holds sway and lets it enter into an openness.]56 Humanity is violence-doing not in addition to and aside from other qualities, but solely in the sense that from the ground up and in its doing violence, it uses violence against the over-whelming. Because it is doubly deinon in an originally united sense, it is to deinotaton, the most violent: violence-doing in the midst of the overwhelming. But why do we translate deinon as “un-canny”?57 Not in order to cover up or weaken the sense of the violent, the overwhelming, and the violence-doing; quite the contrary. Deinon applies most intensely and intimately to human Being; thus, the essence of this Being that is determined as deinon should come directly into view in its decisive aspect. But then, isn’t the characterization of the violent as the uncanny

a derivative definition—defined in terms of how the violent affects us, while the point is precisely to understand what the deinon is, as it is in itself? But we do not mean the uncanny in the sense of an impression made on our emotional states. {116} We understand the un-canny as that which throws one out of the “canny,” that is, the homely, the accustomed, the current, the unendangered. The unhomely does not allow us to be at home.58 Therein lies the over-whelming. But human beings are the uncanniest, not only because they spends their lives essentially in the midst of the un-canny understood in this sense, but also because they step out, move out of the limits that at first and for the most part are accustomed and homely, because as those who do violence, they overstep the limits of the homely, precisely in the direction of the uncanny in the sense of the overwhelming. But in order to measure this word of the chorus about the human in its entire scope, we must at the same time consider that this word, that the human is to deinotaton, the uncanniest, does not intend to assign the human a particular property, as if the human were something else in addition; instead, the word says: to be the uncanniest is the basic trait of the human essence, into which every other trait must always be drawn. The saying “the human being is the uncanniest” provides the authentic Greek definition of humanity. We first press forward fully to the happening of un-canniness when we experience the power of seeming

together with the struggle against seeming in its essential belonging to Dasein. After the first verses, and with a look back in their direction, the second sustaining and prominent phrase is said as verse 360. The verse is the middle of the second strophe: pantoporos aporos ep’ ouden erchetai: “Everywhere trying out, underway; untried, with no way out he comes to Nothing.” The essential words are pantoporos aporos. The word poros means a going through . . . , a going over to . . . , a route. Everywhere humanity makes routes for itself; in all the domains of beings, of the overwhelming sway, it ventures forth, and in this very way it is flung from every route. Thus, the whole un-canniness of the human, the uncanniest, first opens itself up; it is not just that humans try what is, as a whole, in its un-canniness, not just that as violence-doing they drive themselves in this way beyond what is homely for them, but in all this they first become the uncanniest, because now, as those who on all ways have no way out, they are thrown out of all relation to the homely, and atē, ruin, calamity, overtakes them. We may suspect that this pantoporos aporos contains an interpretation of the deinotaton. {117} The interpretation is completed in the third prominent phrase, verse 370: hupsipolis apolis. We find that this phrase is constructed in the same way, and is even situated in the middle of the antistrophe in the same way, as the earlier pantoporos aporos. Yet what it says points us

toward another dimension of beings. Not poros but polis is named; not all the routes into the domains of beings are named, but the ground and place of human Dasein itself, the spot where all these routes cross, the polis. One translates polis as state <Staat> and city-state <Stadtstaat>; this does not capture the entire sense. Rather, polis is the name for the site <Stätte>, the Here, within which and as which Being-here is as historical. The polis is the site of history, the Here, in which, out of which and for which history happens. To this site of history belong the gods, the temples, the priests, the celebrations, the games, the poets, the thinkers, the ruler, the council of elders, the assembly of the people, the armed forces, and the ships. All this does not first belong to the polis, is not first political, because it enters into a relationship with a statesman and a general and with the affairs of state. Instead, what we have named is political, that is, at the site of history, insofar as, for example, the poets are only poets, but then are actually poets, the thinkers are only thinkers, but then are actually thinkers, the priests are only priests, but then are actually priests, the rulers are only rulers, but then are actually rulers. Are—but this says: use violence as violence-doers and become those who rise high in historical Being as creators, as doers. Rising high in the site of history, they also become apolis, without city and site, lone-some, un-canny, with no way out amidst beings as a whole, and at the same time without ordinance and limit, without structure and fittingness, because they as creators must first ground all this in each case. The first phase shows us the inner contour of the essence of the



But this violence-doing breakaway into the overwhelming sea is woven together with the restless break-in to the indestructible sway of the earth. Let us mark it well: here the earth is called the highest of gods. Violence-doing, the human being disturbs the calm of growth, the nourishing and enduring of the tireless one. Here the overwhelming does not hold sway in self-devouring wildness, but as that which without toil and without tiring, from out of the superiority of the calm of great riches, ripens and dispenses what is inexhaustible and rises above all impatience. The violence-doers break into this sway, year by year they break it up with plows and drive the toilless earth into the restlessness of their toiling. The sea and the earth, the breaking forth and the breaking up, are joined by the kai <“and”> in verse 334, to which corresponds the te <“also”> in verse 338. Let us now hear the antistrophe

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3160-3166). Kindle Edition. 

The first strophe and antistrophe name the sea, the earth, the animal as the overwhelming that the violence-doer allows to break into openness in all its excessive violence. The second strophe outwardly passes from a portrayal of the sea, the earth, the animals to the characterization of the human being. But just as little as the first strophe and antistrophe speak only of nature in the narrower sense does the second strophe speak only of the human being. Instead, what is to be named now, language, understanding, mood, passion, and building, are no less a part of the overwhelming violence than sea and earth and animal. The difference is only that the latter envelop humans in their sway and sustain, beset, and inflame them, whereas what is to be named now pervades them in its sway as that which they have to take over expressly as the beings that they themselves

This pervasive sway becomes no less overwhelming because humans take up this sway itself directly into their violence and use this violence as such. This merely conceals the uncanniness of language, of passions, as that into which human beings as historical are disposed, while it seems to them that it is they who have language and passions at their disposal. The uncanniness of these powers lies in their seeming familiarity and ordinariness. What they yield to humans immediately is merely the inessential, and thus they drive humans out and keep them out of their own essence. In this way, what at bottom is still more distant and more overwhelming than sea and earth becomes something that seems to humans to be the nearest of all. The extent to which humanity is not at home in its own essence is betrayed by the opinion human beings cherish of themselves as those who have invented and who could have invented language and understanding, building and poetry. How is humanity ever supposed to have invented that which pervades it in its sway, due to which humanity itself can be as humanity in the first place? We completely forget the fact that this ode speaks of the violent (deinon), of the uncanny, if we believe that the poet here is having humanity invent such things as building and language. The word edidaxato59 does not mean “human beings invented,” but rather: they found their way into the overwhelming and therein first found themselves: the violence of those who act in this way. The “themselves,”

according to what has been said, means those who at once break forth and break up, capture and subjugate. This breaking forth, breaking up, capturing, and subjugating is in itself the first opening of beings as sea, as earth, as animal. A breaking-forth and breakup happen only insofar as the powers of language, of understanding, of mood, and of building are themselves conquered in doing violence. The violence-doing of poetic saying, of thoughtful projection, of constructive building, of state-creating action, is not an application of faculties that the human being has, but is a disciplining and disposing of the violent forces by virtue of which beings disclose themselves as such, insofar as the human being enters into them. This disclosedness of beings is the violence that humanity has to conquer in order to be itself first of all, that is, to be historical in doing violence in the midst of beings. We must not misinterpret the deinon in the second strophe as meaning either invention or a mere faculty and quality of human beings. {121} Only when we grasp that the need to use violence in language, in understanding, in constructing, in building, co-creates [and this always means: brings forth]60 the violent act of laying out the paths into the beings that envelop humanity in their sway—only then do we understand the uncanniness of all that does violence. For when human beings are everywhere underway in this sense, their having no way out does not arise in the external sense that they run up against outward

restrictions and cannot get any farther. Somehow or another they precisely can always go farther into the and-so-forth. Their not having a way out consists, instead, in the fact that they are continually thrown back on the paths that they themselves have laid out; they get bogged down in their routes, get stuck in ruts, and by getting stuck they draw in the circle of their world, get enmeshed in seeming, and thus shut themselves out of Being. In this way they turn around and around within their own circle. They can turn aside everything that threatens this circuit. They can turn every skill to the place where it is best applied. The violence-doing, which originally creates the routes, begets in itself its own unessence, the versatility of many twists and turns,61 which in itself is the lack of ways out, so much so that it shuts itself out from the way of meditation on the seeming within which it drifts around. There is only one thing against which all violence-doing directly shatters. That is death. It is an end beyond all completion, a limit beyond all limits. Here there is no breaking forth and breaking up, no capturing and subjugating. But this uncanniness, which drives us simply and suddenly out and away from everything homely once and for all, is not some special event that we should also mention among other events because in the end it, too, is going to occur. The human being has no way out in the face of death, not only when it is time to die, but constantly and essentially. Insofar as the human is, each stands in the no-exit of death. Thus, Being-here is the happening of un-canniness itself. (The happening of uncanniness must for us be grounded inceptively as Being-here.)

With the naming of this violent and uncanny thing, the poetic projection of Being and of the human essence sets its own limits for itself.


3. The basic trait of the deinotaton lies in the reciprocal relation of the two senses of deinon. The knower fares into the midst of fittingness, draws Being into beings [in the “draft”],66 and yet can never conquer the overwhelming. Thus, the knower is thrown this way and that between fittingness and un-fittingness, between the wretched and the noble. Every violent taming of the violent is either victory or defeat. Both throw one out of the homely, each in a different way, and they first unfold, each in a different way, the dangerousness of the Being that has been won or lost. Both, each in a different way, are menaced by perdition. The one who is violence-doing, the creative one, who sets out into the un-said, who breaks into the un-thought, who compels what has never happened and makes appear what is unseen, this violence-doing one stands at all times in daring (tolma, line 371). Insofar as he dares the conquest of Being, he must risk the assault of un-beings, the mē kalon,67 disintegration, un-constancy, un-structure, and unfittingness. The higher the peak of historical Dasein rises, the more gaping is the abyss for the sudden plunge into the unhistorical, which then only flails around in a confusion that has no way out and at the same time has no site. Having come

# summary
 Doing violence must shatter against the excessive violence of Being, as long as Being holds sway in its essence, as phusis, as emerging sway.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3295-3296). Kindle Edition. 

content of this poetry and thinking. In the second phase, in our summary characterization of the concluding strophe, we deliberately highlighted the reciprocal relation of dikē and technē. Dikē is the overwhelming fittingness. Technē is the violence-doing of knowing. The reciprocal relation between them is the happening of uncanniness.

What we still need in order to prove our assertion in general is this. We already indicated how in apprehending, as the taking up that takes in,72 beings as such are disclosed, and thus come forth into unconcealment. For the poet, the assault of technē against dikē is the happening through which human beings become homeless. When one is put out of the home in this way, the home first discloses itself as such. But at the same time, and only in this way, the alienating first discloses itself, the overwhelming as such. In the happening of uncanniness, beings as a whole open themselves up. This opening up is the happening of unconcealment. This is nothing other than the happening of uncanniness.


So now we must show the sobriety of thinking in its true light. We will do so through the detailed interpretation of the saying. We say in advance: if we should show that apprehending, in its belonging-together with Being (dikē), is such that it uses violence, and as doing violence is an urgent need, and as an urgent need is undergone only in the necessity of a struggle [in the sense of polemos and eris confrontation and

strife],73 and if in addition we should demonstrate that apprehending stands explicitly in connection with logos, and this logos proves to be the ground of human Being, then our assertion that there is an inner affinity between the thoughtful saying and the poetic saying will have been grounded. We will show three things: 1. Apprehending is not a mere process, but a de-cision. 2. Apprehending stands in an inner essential community with logos. Logos is an urgent need. 3. Logos grounds the essence of language. As such, logos is a struggle and it is the grounding ground of historical human Dasein in the midst of beings as a whole. On 1. Noein, apprehending, is not yet adequately conceived in its essence if we simply avoid lumping it together with the activity of thinking and even with judging. We have characterized apprehending as taking up a position to receive the appearing of beings.74 As such, it is nothing other than setting out upon one’s own, distinct way. But this implies that apprehending is a passage through the crossing of the threefold way. Apprehending can become this passage only if it is fundamentally a de-cision for Being against Nothing, and thus a confrontation with seeming. But such essential de-ciding, when it is carried out and when it resists the constantly pressing ensnarement in the everyday and the customary, has to use violence. This act of violence, this de-cided setting-out upon the way to the Being of beings,
moves humanity out of the homeliness of what is most directly nearby and what is usual.
I

the fit <Fuge> of Being, but must mean, together with apprehending, that (human) act of violence by virtue of which Being is gathered in its gatheredness. Needful is gathering, the gathering that belongs to apprehending. Both must happen “for the sake of Being.” Here, gathering means seizing oneself when one is dispersed in the in-constant, snatching oneself up and out of the confused entanglement in seeming. But this gathering, which is still a turning away, can be carried out only by virtue of the gathering that, as a turning toward, pulls beings together into the gatheredness of their Being. Thus, logos as gathering enters into urgent need here and separates itself from logos as the gatheredness of Being (phusis). Logos as gathering, as human self-gathering to fittingness, first transposes Being-human into its essence and thus sets it into the un-canny, inasmuch as at-homeness is ruled by the seeming of the customary, the usual and the trite.

Being-human, as the urgency of apprehending and gathering, is the urging into the freedom of taking over technē, the knowing setting-into-work of Being. Thus there is history.


{132} The word, the name, sets the self-opening beings out of the immediate, overwhelming assault, back into their Being, and preserves them in this openness, delimitation, and constancy. Naming does not come afterward, providing a

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3435-3437). Kindle Edition. 

in the structure of its gatheredness. This opening-up is gathered in the second sense, according to which the word preserves what is originally gathered, and thus the word stewards phusis, which holds sway. Human beings, as those who stand and act in logos, in gathering, are the gatherers. They take over and fulfill the stewardship of the sway of the overwhelming. But we know that this doing violence is what is most uncanny. For the sake of tolma, daring,77 humanity necessarily meets with the wretched as well as with the valiant and noble. When language

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3439-3444). Kindle Edition. 

Here logos stands in the most intimate bond with krinein, cutting as de-ciding, in carrying out the gathering to the gatheredness of Being. Selective “gleaning” <das auslesende “Lesen”> grounds and sustains the pursuit of Being and the rejection of seeming. The meaning of krinein includes: to select, to bring into relief, to set the measure that determines rank.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3468-3471). Kindle Edition. 

norm. Instead, it happens in and from historical necessity, from the urgency of historical Dasein. {135} Legein and noein, gathering and apprehending, are an urgent need and an act of violence against the overwhelming, but at the same time always and only for it. Thus, the violence-doers must time and again shrink back from this use of violence, and yet they cannot back down. In this will to conquer that at the same time shrinks back, at moments the possibility must flare up that the conquest of the overwhelming can be fully and most certainly fought out if the concealment of Being—the emerging sway, which in itself essentially unfolds as logos, as the gatheredness of the conflicting—is simply preserved, and thus, in a certain way, every possibility of appearing is withheld. This audacity [which in truth is the highest recognition]83 belongs to the violence-doing of the uncanniest: to overwhelm the appearing sway by withholding all openness toward it, and to measure up to it by keeping the site of appearing closed to its almighty sway.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3504-3513). Kindle Edition. 

norm. Instead, it happens in and from historical necessity, from the urgency of historical Dasein. {135} Legein and noein, gathering and apprehending, are an urgent need and an act of violence against the overwhelming, but at the same time always and only for it. Thus, the violence-doers must time and again shrink back from this use of violence, and yet they cannot back down. In this will to conquer that at the same time shrinks back, at moments the possibility must flare up that the conquest of the overwhelming can be fully and most certainly fought out if the concealment of Being—the emerging sway, which in itself essentially unfolds as logos, as the gatheredness of the conflicting—is simply preserved, and thus, in a certain way, every possibility of appearing is withheld. This audacity [which in truth is the highest recognition]83 belongs to the violence-doing of the uncanniest: to overwhelm the appearing sway by withholding all openness toward it, and to measure up to it by keeping the site of appearing closed to its almighty sway.

Considered in terms of the essence of space, the difference between the two types of appearing is this: appearing in the first and authentic sense, as the gathered bringing-itself-to-stand, takes space in; it first conquers space; as standing there, it creates space for itself; it brings about everything that belongs to it, while it itself is not imitated. Appearing in the second sense merely steps forth from an already prepared space, and it is viewed by a looking-at within the already fixed dimensions of this space. The aspect offered by the thing, and no longer the thing itself, now becomes what is decisive. Appearing in the first sense first rips space open. Appearing in the second sense simply gives space an outline and measures the space that has been opened up.92


what it makes an assertion about, when the assertion is directed by beings. Truth becomes the correctness of logos. Thus, logos steps out of its original inclusion in the happening of unconcealment in such a way that decisions about truth, and so about beings, are made on the basis of logos and with reference back to it—and not only decisions about beings, but even, and in advance, about Being. Logos is now legein ti kata tinos, saying something about something.98 That about which something is said is in each case what lies at the basis of the assertion, what lies before it, hupokeimenon (subjectum). From the point of view of the logos that has become independent as assertion, Being displays itself as this lying-there. [The possibility of this determination of Being is prefigured in phusis, as is the idea. Only the

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3664-3670). Kindle Edition. 


Here, on the path of this lecture course, one decisive hint must suffice. We know from Heraclitus and Parmenides that the unconcealment of beings is not simply present at hand. Unconcealment happens only in so far as it is brought about by the work: the work of the word as poetry, the work of stone in temple and statue, the work of the word as thinking,

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3744-3747). Kindle Edition. 
the work of the polis as the site of history that grounds and preserves all this. [“Work,” according to what we said earlier, is here always to be understood in the Greek sense as ergon, as that which comes to presence and which is pro-duced into unconcealment.]107 The striving for the unconcealment of beings and thus of Being in the work, this striving for the unconcealment of beings, which in itself already happens only as constant antagonism, is always at the same time the strife against concealment, covering-up, against seeming.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3747-3751). Kindle Edition. 

way to truth as correctness lies open. This happening of the transformation of unconcealment, by way of distortion, to undistortedness and from this to correctness, must be seen together with the transformation of phusis into idea, of logos as gathering into logos as assertion. On the basis of all this, the final interpretation of Being that is secured in the word ousia works itself out and works itself to the fore. Ousia means Being in the sense of constant presence, presence at hand. Consequently, what really is, is what always is, aei on. What is continuously present is what we must go back to, in advance, in all comprehending and producing of anything: the model, the idea. What is continuously present is what we must go back to in all logos, asserting, as what always already lies at hand, the hupokeimenon, subjectum. What always already lies at hand before us is, from the point of view of phusis, of emergence, what is proteron, the earlier, the a priori. 

This determination of the Being of beings characterizes the way in which beings stand against all comprehending and asserting. The hupokeimenon is the forerunner of the later interpretation of the being as object.108 Apprehending, noein, is taken over by logos in the sense of the assertion. It thus becomes the apprehending that, in determining something as something, analyzes it, thinks it through by taking it through,109 dianoeisthai. This analysis by means of assertions, dianoia, is the essential determination of the understanding in the sense of the representing that makes judgments. Apprehending becomes understanding, apprehending becomes reason. Christianity reinterprets the Being of beings as Being-created. Thinking and knowing come to be distinguished from faith (fides). This does not hinder the rise of rationalism and irrationalism, but rather first prepares it and strengthens it.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3772-3779). Kindle Edition. 

look. According to Plato, the idea of ideas, the highest idea, is the idea tou agathou, the idea of the good. The “good” here does not mean what is orderly in the moral sense, but the valiant, which achieves and can achieve what is proper to it. The agathon is the standard as such, what first grants Being the potency to unfold essentially as idea, as prototype.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3820-3823). Kindle Edition. 


value. Values as such now become the ground of the ought. But since values stand opposed to the Being of beings, in the sense of facts, they themselves cannot be. So instead, one says that they are valid. Values provide the measure for all domains of beings, that is, of what is present at hand. History is nothing but the actualization of values. Plato conceived of Being

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3847-3850). Kindle Edition. 

value. It cites 661 publications on the concept of value. Probably by now there are a thousand. All this calls itself philosophy. In particular, what is peddled about nowadays as the philosophy of National Socialism, but which has not the least to do with the inner truth and greatness of this movement [namely, the encounter between global technology and modern humanity],115 is fishing in these troubled waters of “values” and “totalities.” Yet we can see how stubbornly

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3859-3862). Kindle Edition. 

Endurance, perpetual identity, presence at hand, lying at hand—all at bottom say the same: constant presence, on as ousia. This determinateness of Being is not accidental. It grows out of the determination117 under which our historical Dasein stands by virtue of its great inception among the Greeks. The determinateness of Being is not a matter of delimiting a mere meaning of a word. It is the power that today still sustains and prevails over all our relations to beings as a whole, to becoming, to seeming, to thinking, and to the ought.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3907-3911). Kindle Edition. 


this far in pursuing the question about Being as what is most worthy of questioning. That over against which Being is limited—becoming, seeming, thinking, the ought—is not just something that we have thought up. Here, powers are holding sway that bewitch and prevail over beings, their opening up and formation, their closing and deformation. Becoming—is it nothing? Seeming—is it nothing? Thinking—is it nothing? The ought—is it nothing? By no means.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3924-3927). Kindle Edition. 

VIOLATE = RAPE
Dasein remains so alien to us. Not-Being-here is the ultimate victory over Being. Dasein is the constant urgency of defeat and of the renewed resurgence of the act of violence against Being, in such a way that the almighty sway of Being violates86 Dasein (in the literal sense), makes Dasein into the site of its
appearing, envelops and pervades Dasein in its sway, and thereby holds it within Being.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Location 3533). Kindle Edition. 
Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3530-3533). Kindle Edition. 
Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3771-3772). Kindle Edition. 

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3763-3771). Kindle Edition. 

calculable for us” (no. 516). “‘What is’ belongs to our optics” (no. 517). Here Be-ing is just a schema that is biologically necessary for the preservation and enhancement of life, sprung from the equating function of the logical proposition.

up a “logically correct” language in which the propositions of metaphysics, which are all pseudopropositions, will in the future become impossible. Thus, an article in Volume II of this journal (1931–32) is titled “The Overcoming of Metaphysics through the Logical Analysis of Language.”5 What is going on here is the uttermost reduction and deracination of the traditional theory of judgment under the illusion of mathematical scientificity. Here one draws the ultimate conclusions of a thinking that began with Descartes, for whom already truth was no longer the openness of beings—and accordingly, the integration and grounding of Dasein within the beings that are opened up—but truth was diverted into certainty—the mere securing of thought, and of mathematical thought in particular, as opposed to all that cannot be thought in this way. This conception of truth as the securing of thought led to the ultimate god-riddance of the world. The supposed “philosophical” direction of today’s mathematical-physical positivism wants to provide a foundation for this position. It is no accident that this sort of “philosophy” wants to provide the basis for modern physics, in which all relations to nature are destroyed. It is also no accident that this sort of “philosophy” has internal and external connections to Russian communism. It is no accident, either, that this sort of thinking celebrates its triumphs in America. All these are just the final consequences of the seemingly merely grammatical point that Be-ing is conceived on the basis of the “is,” and the “is” is interpreted in each case according to a conception of the proposition and of thinking.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 4358-4370). Kindle Edition. 

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 4352-4354). Kindle Edition. 

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3606-3612). Kindle Edition. 

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3504-3513). Kindle Edition. 

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3403-3404). Kindle Edition. 

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3391-3398). Kindle Edition. 
Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - ntroduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Location 3379). Kindle Edition. 
Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3366-3379). Kindle Edition. 

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3363-3366). Kindle Edition. 
Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3356-3361). Kindle Edition. 

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3334-3337). Kindle Edition. 
Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3268-3279). Kindle Edition. 
Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3230-3231). Kindle Edition. 
Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3217-3229). Kindle Edition. 

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3205-3217). Kindle Edition. 
Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3194-3205). Kindle Edition. 

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3187-3193). Kindle Edition. 



Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3133-3146). Kindle Edition. 
Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3121-3133). Kindle Edition. 

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3109-3121). Kindle Edition. 

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3096-3109). Kindle Edition. 

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3085-3096). Kindle Edition. 

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3039-3055). Kindle Edition. 

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 3028-3038). Kindle Edition. 

Parmenides shares Heraclitus’s standpoint. And where else should these two Greek thinkers, the founders of all thinking, stand if not in the Being of beings? For Parmenides, too, Being is the hen, xuneches, that which holds itself together in itself, mounon, uniquely unifying, oulon, the constantly complete, constantly self-showing sway, through which there also constantly shines the seeming of the one-sided and many-sided.39 Therefore, the unavoidable path to Being leads through unconcealment, yet always remains a threefold path.

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2865-2869). Kindle Edition. 

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2816-2828). Kindle Edition. 

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2816-2828). Kindle Edition. 

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2812-2816). Kindle Edition. 



Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2791-2793). Kindle Edition. 


Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2701-2707). Kindle Edition. 


Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2690-2700). Kindle Edition. 

Martin Heidegger. Fried, Gregory_Heidegger, Martin - Introduction to Metaphysics-Yale University Press (2014) (Kindle Locations 2563-2566). Kindle Edition. 

















Elemental
==========

Reflections on the Philosophy of Hitlerism

Levinas Antifascist Jew writing against Heraclitus in 1934.  Against the concordat made by the pope, an alliance between religion and state key to fascist takeover