# Chapter One: Identity and Responsibility

## Summary

In this chapter, I will sketch out the methodology I will attempt to follow throughout the rest of the book.  
 In what way does this work attempt to inscribe my own name into the book of dead philosophers? Who is the "I" that writes in this book and what is the "who" of this "I"? How should I engage other philosophers and other interlocutors, some of whom are deceased and some still alive, yet all of whom I approach only through their dead letters, the corpse of their written corpus?

This chapter will attempt to identify and situate the actual writer of this text, Mitchell Cowen Verter. It will perhaps attempt to delve into some autobiographical facts but definitely will consider the significance of first-person testimonial for philosophy. It will also meditate upon Levinas's strange essay "Signature" to demonstrate how any attempt to portray oneself winds up as merely a chronology of lifeless empirical material facts.

Beyond this question of self-presentation, I will reflect on the concept of identity itself. The problematic of who or what the self is emerges an explicit theme in the empiricism of Locke and others: given the flux of sensations, what does it mean to posit the existence of a self that persists over time? In Hegel, this problematic of self is shown not to be an individual question but already a dialogic and social one. However, Hegel understands this dialogue to be a violent one, a murderous struggle between two selves for the right of only one to assert himself. Locke and Hegel's notions of self-assertive selfhood will be challenged from two complementary directions. From Levinas, we will understand the self as a "me voici" ("here I am"), as a moment of reponsibility, a type of response to the ethical exigencies inherited from the Other of one's own past as well as the myriad of other Others. In many ways, this model can best be understood as analogous to Althusser's concept of "interpellation", in which the identity of the subject is constituted through the way that it is invoked by power. Within the course of this analysis, we will also bring up the Buddhist idea of _anatman_ which argues, in distinction to Vedanta thought, that no self exists, only the phenomenological experience of self.

The analysis of selfhood has already introduced the idea that the self is already constituted through dialogical relationships with that which is Other than the self. Because this text aspires precisely to be a series of dialogues, we must ask ourselves how to position ourselves responsibly within the discursive field. The question of positioning immediately requires us to consider the problematic of perspective, namely Nietzschean perspectivism and feminist Standpoint Theory. Nietzschean perspectivism opposes the idea of a purely objective (for Nietzsche, Kantian) understanding of anything because, he claims, all interpretation is always/already determined by the subject's perspectival Will-to-Power. Standpoint Feminism combines Nietzsche's insights with Marxist analysis to demonstrate how the perspective of the speaker is always/already determined by its identities within networks of class-power relationships by a myriad of social and material factors. In contrast to Nietzsche's belief that one's perspective emanates from the subject, we will read Levinas closely to demonstrate an alternative idea of perspectivism. Throughout his work, Levinas asserts that each movement within his ethical analysis is fully determined by the way in which the self is oriented towards the other. From these remarks, we will attempt to reconstruct an alternative idea of perspectivism, which proceedes not from subjectivity but already in and through intersubjective relations. Most likely, this Levinasian perspectivism can be correlated positively to Standpoint Theory in a similar manner to the way that the "me voici" was correlated with interpellation.

Since this text intends to be a dialogue with the history of philosophy, an inscription into the book of dead philosophers, we must ask ourselves what is the proper way to conduct ourselves as interlocutors within this discourse. As Nancy Hartsock points out in her article "The Barracks Myth", too many of our conceptual models are determined by militarism. So much of the language and the models of philosophy emerge from military models -- as observable, for example, from the way we refer to philosophical ideas as "arguments", or conceive of the _agora_ as a site of intellectual combat within a masculine public sphere, or even the embarrassing way that academic philosophers position themselves into camps competing with each other.

Here I have to actually be somewhat careful in my analysis and think through a few terms. First of all, I need to _justify_ my claim that words such as "argument" are primarily military rather than juridical -- or rather I need to better understand the connection between military language and juridical language, which I currently do not. Perhaps Hartsock's article might provide some insight? Similarly, I would like to claim that there is a problem with the notion of "critique" itself, that critique is already a form of violence. To what extent does _kritien_, the act of a separating and sorting, always/already require the violent cutting of a de-cide-ing, in the sense of authoritarian political decisionism alluded to by Heidegger and Carl Schmitt? By raising this question, I do intend to throw into question the entire critical enterprise from Kant to the Frankfurt School and Critical Theory. However, I am not entirely sure whether reading "critique" as a type of violence is entirely judicious. Again, I need to resolve the relationship between the juridical and the military. I am not sure how to do this.

Is it possible to engage in philosophical discourse without violence? It is unclear whether it is possible to resolve this question. Perhaps even the temptation to seek for resolution is already a temptation to violence? Perhaps the most peaceful way to resolve the question is to leave it open? We will explore the strategy of leaving questions unanswered through a discussion of the practice of Buddhist meditation as a practice of deferring responses

We will provide several passages from Derrida and Levinas, on the nature of the philosophical community and of philosophy as a dogmatism that always calls for a skeptical critique, to explore this problematic in an affirmative way. We will resolve to at least attempt to speak of other philosophers only in eulogy, or at least in non-violent conversation, and to pursue the strategy of leaving questions unanswered when necessary.

In an earlier draft of this chapter outline, I had proposed to illustrate several aspects of the discussion with several concrete examples. I am not sure these still fit well, but in the interest of not losing these ideas: (1) The problematic of self-identity over time will be illustrated by discussing the everyday situation of trying to find your belt, and having to remember that the last person who was also you left that belt on yesterday's pants rather than putting it in the closet as a sartorial Kantian might do; (2) The problematic of relating to concrete others will be illustrated by the exigencies of electronic communication through periodic, iterative, asynchronous communication, how one is periodically obligated to respond even if one doesn't. Ths discussion goes very deep and will ultimately result in a meditation on the Turing Test, in which the criterion of machinic intelligence is measured by its capability to respond in a human manner.

## Sections
