
*             xxi) Continuous Creation vs. Genealogy 
*                 (1) Viewing Power https://www.waste.org/~roadrunner/writing/ViewingPower/TotalityAndInfinity.htm
*                 (2)  Levinas’ analysis of light and his opposition to Heidegger can be understood through a comparison of the Jewish and the Christian accounts of creation.  Following Nietzsche, Heidegger explicitly critiques Christianity as a popularization of the Platonic reduction of the logos (logoV.) Heidegger contends that the logos originally referred to Dasein as the gathering-place for the strife (polemoV) of Being.  Christianity obscures this notion of logos-as-gathering by interpreting Christ as the logos.  Following the Alexandrian-Jewish[1] philosopher Philo, the Gospel of John describes Jesus as the phenomenon which mediates man’s relationship with the divine.  Furthermore, John 1:9 explains Christ as the source of divine light as it is revealed to men, “That was the true Light, which lights every man that comes into the world.”  Therefore, this book collapses the concept of the logos as light with the notion of a publicly accessible Word which subsists outside of man’s existence.  Against this, Heidegger forwards an almost Gnostic idea[2] that each Dasein, as an individual, can potentially exist as its own true light, lighting itself as it comes into the world.  In contrast to both John’s and Heidegger’s accounts of revelation, the Book of Genesis introduces God’s first act of creation in the following manner: “And God said, ‘Let there be light’ and there was light.”  Contrary to the implicit claims of both John and Philo, this verse does not merely imply that revelation occurs through a substantive word, through the nominal.  Rather, it describes the light of phenomena as preceded by and issuing forth from God’s exercise of speech.[3] 
*                 (3)      	Levinas describes the light of truth and of representation as something which becomes manifested between speaking interlocutors.  In his book Totality and Infinity, he carefully describes the phenomenological transformations of this discussion.  Levinas describes me as I posit myself in a “Now,” in a present moment in which I speak to the Other, am heard by her, and receive a reply from him.[4]  As with Heidegger, Levinas employs the resources of Husserl’s phenomenology to follow the course of this discussion.  Although Levinas, like Heidegger, opposes Husserl’s model of intentionality for implicitly positing a spectatorial subject which merely looks at an object, he finds metaphysical notions within Husserl which subvert the apparent ontological interpretations.  He claims that Husserl’s major insight was that “notions under the direct gaze of thought that defines them are nevertheless, unbeknown to this naive thought revealed to be implanted in horizons unsuspected by this thought ... The break-up of the formal structure of thought (the noema of a noesis) into events which this structure dissimulates, but which sustain it and restore its concrete significance, constitutes a deduction — necessary and yet non-analytical.”[5]  Levinas demonstrates that the intentional relationship which separates consciousness from its objects is not foundational, but rather is itself produced through certain genealogical developments of the relationship between the Other and me. 
*                 (4)      	Levinas claims, “The difference between the Other and me do not depend upon different properties. ... They are due to the I-Other conjunction, to the inevitable orientation of being “starting from oneself” towards “the Other.”  The priority of this orientation over the terms that are placed in it (and which can not arise without this orientation) summarizes the theses of the present work.”[6]  Levinas description of Being is as radically perspectival as Nietzsche’s.[7]  However, whereas Nietzsche describes the experiences of a subject whose being and whose perspectives are determined by its will to power, Levinas describes my experiences in having my being and my perspectives be determined by my ethical position as the interlocutor of the Other.  Derrida’s analysis of the structure of Levinas’ writing illuminates his intricate perspectivism.  “In Totality and Infinity the thematic development is neither purely descriptive nor purely deductive.  It proceeds with the infinite insistence of waves on a beach:  return and repetition, always, of the same wave against the same shore, in which however, as each return recapitulates itself, it also infinitely renews and enriches itself.”[8]  As Heidegger might say, Levinas’ writing repeatedly presents the same “factical situation,” yet, each time, it thematizes this situation from a new perspective.  By varying perspectives, Levinas does not merely give the reader a “better view” of the same event.  Rather, these different perspectives constitute each situation as a new and different ontological, phenomenological, and metaphysical event.  These perspectives are produced as and through my intercourse with the Other.  The evolution and transformation of our discussion produces intentional relationships which connect us and which orient me metaphysically.  I speak to the Other who responds to me.  As will be shown in this paper, each event within this complex intercourse reveals its own intentional horizons. 
*                 (5)      	To fully understand Levinas’ conception of vision and power, one must trace how these capacities evolve and transform throughout each stage of my ethical development.  Against Heidegger’s description of Dasein as a dynamic temporalization, Levinas analyzes the time of discourse as a series of discrete, separated moments in which I am born, die and am reborn.  In Time and the Other, he describes the birth of an individuated ego as his power to posit his identity, thereby escaping from the there is, an impersonal and eternal realm of undifferentiated existence.  Totality and Infinity no longer refers to this event of separation as a power, but rather as the capacity to resist totalization.  Levinas states, “The separation of the Same is produced in the form of an inner life, as psychism ... It is already a way of being, resistance to this totality. ... The dimension of the psychism opens under the force of the resistance a being opposes to its totalization.”[9]  In direct opposition to Heidegger’s assertion that Dasein’s power develops from its futural appropriation of its heritage, Levinas explains that my capacity to resist the weight of the past in a present moment constitutes my force of resistance.  Previous to this moment of separation, this separation in and as a moment, I had effectively perished when my works and my statements were alienated from myself by the impersonal institutions and public interpretations which subsumed them.  I break with the domination of the totality by shedding my former manifestation and founding myself in a new moment in which I have an opportunity to make a new statement.  Not only does this psychism separate me temporally, it also separates me ontologically.  Against Heidegger who sees Dasein’s Being as always embedded within the impersonal dominance of Being, Levinas reappropriates the Cartesian distinction between an internal mental sphere and an external reality.  According to Levinas, I resist being absorbed by the tyranny of Being by establishing the limit of my identity and creating an interior psychical realm which can not be violated by any external force or person.
* 