SECTION: Perspectivism	
* Here speak about perspectivism from a Levinasian POV, as distinct from our common perspectivism (Levinas/Nietzsche)   
*                 (1) See Levinas, Perverter
* http://www.waste.org/~roadrunner/writing/Levinas/LevinasPerverter_20_1.htm 
*                 (2) Nietzsche:  “There is only a perspective seeing, only a perspective “knowing.””[4
*                 (3)  Levinas claims, “The difference between the Other and me do not depend upon different properties. ... They are due to the I-Other conjunction, to the inevitable orientation of being “starting from oneself” towards “the Other.”  The priority of this orientation over the terms that are placed in it (and which can not arise without this orientation) summarizes the theses of the present work.”[6
* 
* 
*                         (i) 
*                         (ii) Now that we have a preliminary understanding of Levinas’s particular usage of tropes, we can better investigate why he seems so attached to what Derrida calls “the family schema” (PF viii). Already a doubling reversal is expressed through this trope: the “familiar” already hyperbolically inverts the Other’s existence as an alien, as “not resting on any prior kinship” (TI 34).  For Levinas, the notion of “family” connotes the way an individuated, separated multiplicity of entities are already related to each other, through social temporalities and moral obligations that preexist the political order.  Contrasting his analysis with a philosophical tradition stretching from Plato to Hegel, he asserts “the family does not only result from a rational arrangement of animality; it does not simply mark a step towards the anonymous universality of the State.  It identifies itself outside of the State, even if the State reserves a framework for it” (TI 306).
*                         (iii) Filiality does not emerge simply as a social construction, but rather constitutes a responsibility for other human beings independently of unifying structures such as Hegelian Spirit or Heideggerean Being.  Writing from within the phenomenological tradition, Levinas most pointedly questions the reductive universalization of Husserl’s genus (TI 194-96), a term derived from the Indo-European GEN, signifying “birth.”[13]  For Levinas, the generative family demonstrates that, rather than merely issuing from an origin, existence is a continuous creation: “the discontinuity of Cartesian time, which requires a continuous creation, indicates the very dispersion and plurality of created being” (TI 58).[14]
*                         (iv) There is a sense in which Totality and Infinity may be read as if were the first Book of Moses, Genesis or בְּרֵאשִׁית, [15] the story of the engendering of generations.  It tells a story of life stage development, from birth through mature home ownership, through old age, through sex and death, to rebirth.  Levinas employs the terminology of birth repeatedly to describe a variety of interconnected phenomenological events such as the “latent birth” of the subject (OTB 139), the “birth of love” in Eros (TI 277), and the “birth of thought, consciousness, justice, and philosophy … of a meaning” through the third party (OTB 128). 
*                         (v) In the life-stage narrative of Totality and Infinity, the event of birth is explored through the opening section on enjoyment, “the very production of a being that is born, that breaks the tranquil eternity of its seminal or uterine existence to enclose itself in a person” (TI 147).[16]  The motifs Levinas employs in this original section are connected to other metaphorical networks throughout his work.  In addition to being a member of the biblical triad of destitution along with the stranger and the widow (TI 77), the “orphan” describes a particular aspect of this production of being, “an orphan by birth” (OTB 105).  This orphan event occurs because the child is born separated, after the erotic death of the mother and the father, “having absolved oneself from relations” (TI 195), separated from all relatives, constantly menaced by neediness.  One reversal of this concept--this conception--of the orphan is the concept of the work, which Levinas describes as “always in a certain sense an abortive action” (TI 228, my italics), a doubling of birth and death.
*                         (vi) As mentioned above, this continuous GENesis must be understood as a creative enGENdering, and thus gender informs all phenomenological matters.  As with the family, gender is essential for overcoming a unifying totality.  Levinas asserts, “The difference between the sexes is a formal structure, but one that carves up reality in another sense and conditions the very possibility of reality as multiple, against the unity of being proclaimed by Parmenides” (TO 44).  For Levinas, gender is essential for breaking with “the neuter (the sole gender formal logic knows)” (TI 256), and with the neutral, Heideggerean Being that Blanchot criticizes (TI 298).  Unlike German and English which do have neuter cases, the French language gives all proper nouns a masculine or feminine gender.  For example, “le sujet” is masculine in French, just as human subjectivity and political citizenship have traditionally been figured as masculine by male philosophers. 
*                 (2) 
*             ii) 
* 