    15) Self and Property  https://www.waste.org/~roadrunner/writing/Levinas/SelfAndProperty_FinalEssay_WEB.htm
*         a) The work of Emmanuel Levinas attempts to rethink the position of the individual self, reconsidering the way it is structured as a responsibility to the other person.  Such an inquiry into selfhood necessarily raises the question of what is subsumed within the personal sphere, the suum.  In his first magnum opus, Totality and Infinity, Levinas expresses this idea with a phrase borrowed from both Hegel and Sartre, writing that individual is ‘for-itself.’  “The subject is ‘for itself.’  It represents itself and knows itself as long as it is.  But in knowing or representing itself, it possesses itself, dominates itself, extends its identity to what of itself comes to refute its identity” (87).  Selfhood, Levinas explains, is not a stable identity but a process of self-identification, of appropriating the diversity of otherness and integrating it back into a unitary selfhood.  Within Totality and Infinity, he delineates the steps by which this procedure occurs.  Before the self involves itself in productive self-creation, he explains, its experience begins through consumption.   
*         b) Levinas explains that the ego is first produced as something that enjoys existence.  The ego is neither a particular instance of a universal category nor something that partakes of elemental forces or codes, but rather something that lives a contented life, living from its contents, fulfilling itself by filling itself.  Levinas describes this initial relationship to the world using the metaphorical language of eating, stating “Nourishment … is the transmutation of the other into the same, which is in the essence of enjoyment: an energy that is other, recognized as other … becomes, in enjoyment, my own energy, my strength, me.  All enjoyment is in this sense alimentation” (111).  This description of the dynamic emergence of selfhood contrasts dramatically with the analyses of Hegel and Locke.  For Hegel, particularity first develops through the exercise of freedom, by the way one expresses oneself through the externalization of one’s will in property.  Although Locke begins with self-preservation and the biblical dispensation for enjoyment, it is productive labor that turns the world into one’s own.  In contrast, Levinas explains that the self initially relates to the other through a process of incorporation and not externalization, through consumption and not production.  By emphasizing consumption, Levinas seems to be drawing attention the way in which one begins one’s existence -- not as an agent asserting its sovereign will and projecting its spirit onto things but rather as someone vulnerable who needs to be sustained by the world in order to survive.   
*         c) More than a reaction to either Locke or Hegel, Levinas’s emphasis on consumption seems to be a response to the way that Heidegger initially situates Dasein (human being).  According to Heidegger, Dasein finds itself already thrown into a situation that surpasses it (174:135).  Although this state of thrownness indicates certain susceptibility within its constitution, Dasein overcomes this passivity by recognizing how it is already engaged in the world.  Dasein is already involved in a variety of productive relationships; it is related to things through relationships of utility that beckon to its hand. Once Dasein recognizes its engaged existence through the possessive relationships of mine-ness (Jemeinenigkeit) and authenticity / own-ness (Eigenlich), it can actively grasp things as they refer to it as ready-to-hand (Vorhanden), concerning itself by “producing, manipulating, and the like” (88) . According to Levinas, one first relates to the world through the mouth that eats rather than the hand that uses: man’s initial relationship is consuming the elemental rather than acting within Being.  He remarks, “The consumption of foods is the food of life” (114).  Therefore, he criticizes Heidegger's analysis for its overemphasis on productivity at the expense of consumption, remarking, "[Heidegger's model of the] world as a set of implements ... bears witness to a particular organization of labor in which foods take on the signification of fuel in the economic machinery. ... Dasein in Heidegger is never hungry" (134). 
*         d) Levinas describes several phenomenological transformations that respond to this dynamic of hunger.  Part of this process entails the development of an economy in which personal property can exist.  In itself, pure enjoyment does not engender any property ownership. Levinas employs the notion of the “elemental” to explain why this is so.  Whereas Hegel finds a lack of will, a res nullis, within the natural world, Levinas describes it as permeated by anonymous elemental forces.  Qualities without substances content sensible enjoyment.  For example, Levinas states that one enjoys the “blue of the sky” (141).  Here, he seems to be claiming that affectivity responds to the adjectival blue rather than a nominal thing such as the ideal of blueness, or the particular object described by blue, the sky. Affect responds to intensities, not to objects.  Thus, Levinas states that these elements are “coming always without my being able to possess the source” (141).   That is, within sensibility, one does not find concrete things which could be seized as property.  Furthermore, Levinas explains enjoyment as a passive process, in which one is affected, undergoing waves of sensation.  Levinas thus claims that ownership is ambiguous within this realm, writing “to possess by enjoying is also to be possessed” (158).  In order for private property to emerge, the relationship of enjoyment must be transformed into a new configuration, a phenomenon which Levinas calls the Home.
*         e) Levinas's notion of the Home seems to be an adaptation of Heidegger's description of how the individual relates to the world. In Being and Time, Heidegger argues that the self is not separated from things as a subject is from an object, but is already engaged in the world.  According to Heidegger, the reason why Dasein is always already in a productive, manipulative relationship with the world is because it is always already “dwelling alongside” the world (54:80ff). Levinas's discussion of the "Home" seems to indicate his ironic critique of this idea. For Levinas, the Home is precisely the event that terminates engagement, separating the individual from the immediacy of his enjoyment.  “Man abides in the world as having come to it from a private domain, from being at home with himself, in which at each moment that he retires” (152).  Emerging from the welcome granted to him by an other person's hospitality, the home establishes a private being, walled off from the anonymity of sensible elements. 
*         f) By situating oneself inside the private realm of one’s domicile, one can relate the outside world back to oneself, laying claim to things within it as one’s property. This home enables labor and possession by creating a breach between the self and the elements in which it had been absorbed.  Through this distance, one can exercise the power of a laboring hand which exercises labor and identifies property.  Overcoming the transience of sensual affect, the hand draws from the element concrete things, objects that endure through time.   In many ways, Levinas’s description of how property is acquired echoes Hegel’s notion that possession negates the independence of the thing (§59): “labor in its possessive grasp suspends the independence of the element… as property the thing is an existent that has lost its being” (158).  For Levinas as for Hegel, possession entails the absolute domination of the property by the owner. 
*         g) According to Levinas, my encounter with the other person prevents the spread of this domination.  This transcendental experience of confronting another person is not akin either to sensual enjoyment or to masterful possession.  The other person is an exterior entity, someone that cannot be absorbed into my internal sphere or made into part of my identity.  However, this encounter is not experienced as a negative limit but rather as a something that is overly positive. The other person, according to Levinas, is not something that eludes the grasp of possession but someone who overwhelms it.  In this experience, he claims, “the I, nonetheless, contains in itself what it can neither contain nor receive solely by virtue of its own identity” (27).  Envisioning the other person’s visage, one’s mind is confronted with a paradoxical experience of containing more than its capacity, something that could not have come from consciousness itself and that consciousness can not integrate into the self’s own identity.  When the other person expresses herself, she produces an image or a work that can be appropriated, yet simultaneously she also expresses a transcendence that cannot be dominated.  However she presents herself, she both preserves her own privacy and maintains the ability to respond in unforeseeable ways.  According to Levinas, the other person transcends not just the self’s power, but its power for power (198).  The only way that one could attempt to exercise absolute power over another person, to appropriate them as property, would be to murder them.  However, murder would grant one possession of only a corpse, not the person herself.
*         h) The encounter with the other person alters the self’s intimate relationship to the world it possesses and allows for the emergence of a common sphere.  Complementing the phenomenology of the Home, Levinas describes another process that conditions ownership, the genesis of the general.  He explains that, because the other person halts the self’s effort to appropriate, it both throws property into question and conditions it.   “Possession itself refers to more profound metaphysical relations: a thing does not resist acquisition.  Other possessors – those whom one cannot possess – contest and therefore can sanction possession itself” (162).  The presence of other persons challenges my immediate enjoyment of goods, and removes me from my solitary experience of them.  Paradoxically, however, this same interaction also allows for the establishment of property.  In order for appropriation to occur, a subject must be counterposed against a field of objects.  According to Levinas, one achieves this separation by presenting oneself and one’s goods to the outside gaze of the visage, to the other person’s vision. “In order that I be able to see things in themselves, that is, represent them to myself, refuse both enjoyment and possession, I must know how to give what I possess” (171).  According to Levinas, I become aware of the general sphere once I generously offer my world to the other person.
*         i) With this analysis, Levinas’s account of the commons differs dramatically from Locke and Hegel.  Although Locke believes that the world was given to man in common, only the negative duty to avoid injuring others remains after creation.  Since the right to existence and the right to property are individuated, generality can only emerge from a consent reached between separated persons pursuing their own ends.  On the other hand, Hegel understands the universal order of the state as that which already conditions the substantial objectification of the particular person.  In contrast, Levinas asserts that I move from my own solitary enjoyment to the common world through communicating with the other person and entering into commerce with him.  Levinas’s analysis of the commons seems to be preferable than that of Locke, who treats the commons either as a something natural that should be privatized or as the epiphenomenal outcome of aggregated interests.  The contrast between Hegel and Levinas, the question of whether we move from the general to the interpersonal or the interpersonal to the general, is much more subtle.  Here it seems worth noting, though, that within The Philosophy of Right, Hegel only seems to consider the logical categories of particularity and universality.  He has no comparable term for alterity, no way to discuss the unique phenomenon of the other person, as he did in the Phenomenology of Spirit.
*         j) For Levinas, the realm of generality is populated not by property or by objects, but by works.  Labor not only incorporates things into my existence, it also produces a thing exterior to myself, a work, a thing that attests to the absence of the worker.  Levinas uses this notion of the work to argue against Locke and Hegel's assertion that labor creates property.  “The product of labor is not an inalienable possession, and it can be usurped by the Other.   Works have a destiny independent of the I, are integrated into an ensemble of works: they can be exchanged, that is, be maintained in the anonymity of money” (176).    Whereas Hegel explained how property expresses the self by the way it embodies the human will, Levinas insists that the work expresses the will as something from which the will has removed itself. Production for Levinas does not expand the personal sphere, but rather creates something external to it, something that can be expropriated and manipulated by other wills.   For Levinas, my labor not only secures what belongs to me, but also situates those expressions of myself in a general economy where they can be appropriated by anyone.  Therefore, the very act of self-assertion and self-manifestation is already a primary exposure and self-alienation. “The other can dispossess me of my work, take it or buy it, and thus direct my very behavior; I am exposed to instigation.  The work is destined to this alien Sinngebung [meaning-giving] from the moment of its origin in me” (227).
*         k) Levinas describes the reverse process in a manner that further complicates the idea of ownership.  Just as our absence is signaled in the ways that we express ourselves in our works, we also appropriate absences through our acquisitions.  The other person, Levinas explains, is symbolized through the way that he has expressed himself in his works.  Thus, I can acquire a certain kind of access to him through the way the person has expressed himself, but, Levinas explains, “we penetrate into this interior world as by burglary” (177).  Levinas’s metaphor of burglary seems particularly striking in this discussion of property.  As mentioned before, the primary threat against which Locke’s treatise defends is that of robbery:  because the primary right of individuals is to promote their own self-interest, any infraction upon this privilege legitimates severe retribution.  In contrast, Levinas’s describes how property is already theft: property is already situated in a public realm, and thus already subject to the economic dynamics of dispossession.  More strikingly, Levinas’s example reconstrues the notion of thievery and the way it affects the personal sphere.  For Levinas, the thief does not represent someone who takes property away from the sphere of selfhood, the suum, but rather someone who penetrates into it.  
*         l) Levinas further explores the susceptibility of the personal sphere in his second major book, Otherwise than Being.  Otherwise than Being reworks the conceptual architecture of Totality and Infinity, focusing more closely on how the personal sphere develops from its responsibility to other persons.  According to Levinas, the Western idea of selfhood is based on the idea that the self can possess itself through an act of identification. “In self-consciousness we identify ourselves across the multiplicity of temporal phases.  It is as though subjective life in the form of consciousness consisted in being itself losing itself and finding itself again so as to possess itself by showing itself, proposing itself as a theme, exposing itself in truth” (99).  In this statement, Levinas seems to be locating the problem of self-consciousness in what he refers to in an early essay as Heraclitus’s problem of the “illusory present” (“Reflections,” 65).  Given that everything changes through the dynamic flux of time, how could one ever posit a stable identity for a thing such as the self?  If one is always changing, isn’t the self already dispersed in otherness?  Levinas claims that philosophy has consistently tried to resolve these problems by developing ways that one can integrate this diversity.  It has proposed various themes through which one can grasp phenomena, allowing one to convert the external other into internal property and thereby establish self-possession.  
*         m) Levinas challenges the authority of these thematic organizing principles by demonstrating that before consciousness can appropriate the ex-ternal, the self is already ex-posed, already open to otherness.  From the very beginning, the suum is already directed by its responsibility to other people.  Otherwise than Being explains this prior exposure by clarifying one of the most puzzling aspects of Totality and Infinity: how is the “other” related to the “Other.”  Totality and Infinity had presented two stages of the self’s development.  First, the self emerges by integrating the “other” into the same, creating the identity of the self.  Secondly, the self relates to the human “Other” as a transcendental entity that can not be appropriated.  In Otherwise than Being, Levinas looks more carefully at the first stage of this process, explaining how sensible enjoyment and consumption is already ethical.  Within sensibility, the self does not yet exist as a self-sufficient entity.  As in Totality and Infinity, Levinas explains that consumption is the process by which the self achieves its identity.  “The taste is the way a sensible subject becomes a volume, or the irreducible event in which the spatial phenomenon of biting becomes the identification called me, which becomes me through the life that lives from its very life” (73).  Levinas argues that within this eating there is already a hunger that drives it.  Whereas consciousness is driven to fulfill itself with contents, there is an underlying emptiness that perpetually troubles this fullness.  According to Levinas, this emptiness indicates the presence of the other person’s absence.  “The relationship with the other puts me into question, empties of myself and empties me without end, showing me ever new resources.  I didn’t know I was so rich, but I no longer have the right to keep anything for myself” (“Meaning”, 94).  One’s responsibility towards the other splits me open, preventing me from isolating myself as a self-sufficient, self-possessed identity.  Levinas describes this process as an inversion and reversal of consumption: eating not only creates identity by internalizing the outside; it is also a “gnawing away at this very identity – identity gnawing away at itself – in a remorse” (OTB, 114).
*         n) According to Levinas, the phenomenology of sensibility indicates an underlying vulnerability and exposedness to other persons.  In contrast to Totality and Infinity’s claim that the self could be characterized as “for itself,” Levinas describes it in Otherwise than Being as a “for-the-other.”  The very movement of incorporating otherness is also equivalent to being haunted by others already within oneself.   The self is already committed to others before it is concerned with itself: it is exposed, posited in an external space filled with the wills of others. In Totality and Infinity, Levinas explained that the sphere of generality was comprised by works that testified to the absent wills of other people.  This would suggest that, when we consume what the world offers, we are appropriating the remnants of others, incorporating their works and their actions as our own.  We are thus claimed by others from the inside; we are created as entities who are already responsible for the legacy that other persons have left behind. Levinas explains “There is a paradox in responsibility, in that I am obliged without this obligation having begun in me, as though an order slipped into my consciousness like a thief, smuggled itself in me” (13).  As in Totality and Infinity, Levinas’s reference to the thief refers not to the act of taking away an external object, but of penetrating into the interior.  In Otherwise than Being, Levinas pushes this metaphor even further, to assert that consumption animates one’s own identity from the inside as a responsibility towards others.
*         o) With this understanding of the world, Levinas helps us to reconsider and perhaps to overcome the prominence that the notion of private property has assumed in this moment of history.  Levinas does so by reconsidering the notions of self, world, and other upon which are founded the ideology of possessive individualism and the institution of ownership, as well as the theories of both Hegel and Locke.  In both of these writers, (1) the self is understood as an agent who exercises his labor to extend his sphere of selfhood; and (2) the world is understood as an empty vessel awaiting animation by the human will.  Locke and Hegel do differ significantly with regard to their views on other people.  Locke practically ignores social duties, whereas Hegel shows how universal social concerns always limit individual actions.  Nevertheless, even Hegel argues that the particularity of each individual’s capacities and resources counterbalance the general right to social welfare, thereby sanctioning inequities in property ownership and modes of subsistence.  In contrast, Levinas does not understand the world as merely an empty field awaiting human agency.  For Levinas, the world is already occupied, haunted by the efforts of past generations of workers.  The self begins its existence not as a productive laborer but as a consumer already enjoying the environment that others have created.  Whereas Levinas’s viewpoint seems to be a vast improvement over both Locke and Hegel’s, he still shares a blind spot with the two of them.  All three writers seem excessively humanist: for all of them, what matters the most in the world is the presence of human wills, either the self’s or the other person’s or society’s.  The natural world itself exerts no significant claim on its own behalf.  For this reason, we still need to consider what sorts of new ethical thinking will be adequate to respond to the environmental challenges confronting our planet today.
*         p) Conclusion
*         q) By analyzing the primary encounter between self and world as one of consumption rather than production, Levinas becomes interesting for modern political-economic thought.  He dislodges the central category of property ownership, conceiving selfhood as an absolute generosity.  “The subjectivity of a man of flesh and blood … is a being torn up from oneself for another in the giving to other of the bread from one’s mouth” (142).  Although Levinas’s hyperbolic language is rhetorically radical, it is not entirely clear the extent to which it can be read as being politically radical.  Despite Levinas’s occasional references to Marx and his philosophical usage of the term “anarchy,” he still seems to support politically the “pathos of liberalism” (TI, 120).  Nevertheless, this paper will conclude by trying to push Levinas’s thought in a more revolutionary direction.  This will be done by analyzing how this essay’s themes of property, production, and consumption are discussed by the Peter Kropotkin in his seminal declaration of anarchocommunism, The Conquest of Bread.
*         r) Kropotkin criticizes the idea of property ownership because, like Levinas, he understands the world to be constituted by the works of other people.  Thus, Kropotkin argues that no individual can lay claim to any particular object because the value of each thing depends on the efforts of an incalculable number of others.  “And even to-day; the value of each dwelling, factory, and warehouse, which has been created by the accumulated labor of the millions of workers, now dead and buried, is only maintained by the very presence and labor of legions of the men who now inhabit that special corner of the globe” (6). According to Kropotkin, property claims are impossible because one’s existence already depends upon an infinite debt to others. The world within which one acts is already constituted by the historical deeds of past workers; one’s actions only become significant because they occur within a contemporary environment where other people currently labor. 
*         s) Given that everyone’s personal effort depends radically upon the efforts of others, Kropotkin further argues that ownership claims cannot be based on labor.  Here, his claim is quite different from the critique of private property leveled by Karl Marx.  In Although Marx’s early “humanist” writings are quite concerned with social needs (Heller, 40), his later critique of capitalism focuses more intensely on the inequity of social production, on an analysis of how the capitalist extracts surplus value from the laborer.  In Capital, Marx roots the source of social value in human labor.  In the first chapter, he claims that the total labor power of society can be divided into discrete units of average labor expended in a given hour (129), further distinguishing between simple and skilled labor.  Kropotkin objects that Marxists and other collectivists place too much emphasis on determining the appropriate value of various kinds of labor.  Thus, he argues:
*         t) It is utterly impossible to draw a distinction between the work of each of these men.   To measure the work by its results leads us to an absurdity; to divide the total work and to measure its fractions by the number of hours spent on the work also leads us to absurdity.  One thing remains:  to put needs above works, and first of all to recognize the right to live, and later on the right to well-being for all those who took their share in production. (231)
*         u) Rather than focusing on labor, ownership, and production, Kropotkin asserts that people should organize themselves in33 such a way as to satisfy the human needs of consumption.
*         v) Kropotkin criticizes the tradition of political economy from Adam Smith to Marx for consistently commencing their analyses with production rather than consumption.  He defends his own decision to reverse the order by explaining
*         w) Perhaps you will say [putting production before consumption] is logical. Before satisfying needs you must create the wherewithal to satisfy them. But before producing anything, must you not feel the need of it? Is it not necessity that first drove man to hunt, to raise cattle, to cultivate land, to make implements, and later on to invent machinery? Is it not the study of needs that should govern production? It would therefore be quite as logical to begin by considering needs and afterwards to discuss the means of production in order to satisfy these needs (238).
*         x) Our capacity to produce, he claims, is sufficient to produce well-being for all, enough housing, clothing, luxury items, and food.  The thing that prevents people from meeting their needs is the exploitation practiced within the contemporary system of private ownership, a system that reduces the majority of people to the barest subsistence.  Instead of allowing this economic system to legitimate itself with the alibi that it practices efficient production, Kropotkin argues that we must begin by considering consumption.  Society, he declares could only hope to meet the needs of all if it returns to the most fundamental question, the question of bread.  “We have the temerity to declare that all have a right to bread, that there is enough bread for all, and that with this watchword of Bread for All the revolution will triumph” (69).
* 
* 