## Introduction: Evolution of mutuality

1. Introduction

   1. Hi. Thanks for coming to my talk.

1. Question of mutuality
1. Kropotkin
1. Hrdy

1. What is evolution?
1. Becoming of the species through time.
1. What is becoming: this is one of the primary questions

   1. How do thing persist in being?

   - This "sist" in persist is from a ancient root "STA", which is echoed in the English word "stand", also in the Spizozist question of "substance". To Exist, "to step out, stand forth", key question of Heidegger, Sartre, and Levinas. For now, though, the question of persistence can be most clearly articulated in the question: in what sense is the thing now the same as as the thing in the past and in the future?
   - How is the present time presented? As a present? , presented at the e. How do things ex- (exist, explode, expand, etc) outwards into time,
   - Locke on Persistence
   - - We have the ideas but of three sorts of substances: 1. GOD. 2. FINITE INTELLIGENCES. 3. BODIES.
   - - "ANOTHER occasion the mind often takes of comparing, is the very being of things, when, considering ANYTHING AS EXISTING AT ANY DETERMINED TIME AND PLACE, we compare it with ITSELF EXISTING AT ANOTHER TIME, and thereon form the ideas of IDENTITY and DIVERSITY." Locke
   - - Particle Theory Locke: Thirdly, The same will hold of every PARTICLE OF MATTER, to which no addition or subtraction of matter being made, it is the same.
   - - Individual: From what has been said, it is easy to discover what is so much inquired after, the PRINCIPIUM INDIVIDUATIONIS; and that, it is plain, is existence itself; which determines a being of any sort to a particular time and place, incommunicable to two beings of the same kind.
   - - let us suppose an atom, i.e. a continued body under one immutable superficies, existing in a determined time and place; it is evident, that, considered in any instant of its existence, it is in that instant the same with itself.
   - - This also shows wherein the identity of the same MAN consists; viz. in nothing but a participation of the same continued life, by constantly fleeting particles of matter, in succession vitally united to the same organized body. of the same continued life, by constantly fleeting particles of matter, in succession vitally united to the same organized body. He that shall place the identity of man in anything else, but, like that of other animals, in one fitly organized body, taken in any one instant, and from thence continued, under one organization of life, in several successively fleeting particles of matter united to it, will find it hard to make an embryo, one of years, mad and sober, the SAME man, by any supposition, that will not make it possible for Seth, Ismael, Socrates, Pilate, St. Austin, and Caesar Borgia, to be the same man.
   - - It is not therefore unity of substance that comprehends all sorts of identity, or will determine it in every case; but to conceive and judge of it aright, we must consider what idea the word it is applied to stands for: it being one thing to be the same SUBSTANCE, another the same MAN, and a third the same PERSON, if PERSON, MAN, and SUBSTANCE, are three names standing for three different ideas;—for such as is the idea belonging to that name, such must be the identity; which, if it had been a little more carefully attended to, would possibly have prevented a great deal of that confusion which often occurs about this matter, with no small seeming difficulties, especially concerning PERSONAL identity, which therefore we shall in the next place a little consider.

       - - This being premised, to find wherein personal identity consists, we must consider what PERSON stands for;—which, I think, is a thinking intelligent being, that has reason and reflection, and can consider itself as itself, the same thinking thing, in different times and places; which it does only by that consciousness which is inseparable from thinking, and, as it seems to me, essential to it: it being impossible for any one to perceive without PERCEIVING that he does perceive. When we see, hear, smell, taste, feel, meditate, or will anything, we know that we do so. Thus it is always as to our present sensations and perceptions: and by this every one is to himself that which he calls SELF:—it not being considered, in this case, whether the same self be continued in the same or divers substances. For, since consciousness always accompanies thinking, and it is that which makes every one to be what he calls self, and thereby distinguishes himself from all other thinking things, in this alone consists personal identity, i.e. the sameness of a rational being: and as far as this consciousness can be extended backwards to any past action or thought, so far reaches the identity of that person; it is the same self now it was then; and it is by the same self with this present one that now reflects on it, that that action was done.
       - - 11. Personal Identity. This being premised, to find wherein personal identity consists, we must consider what PERSON stands for;—which, I think, is a thinking intelligent being, that has reason and reflection, and can consider itself as itself, the same thinking thing, in different times and places; which it does only by that consciousness which is inseparable from thinking, and, as it seems to me, essential to it: it being impossible for any one to perceive without PERCEIVING that he does perceive. When we see, hear, smell, taste, feel, meditate, or will anything, we know that we do so. Thus it is always as to our present sensations and perceptions: and by this every one is to himself that which he calls SELF:—it not being considered, in this case, whether the same self be continued in the same or divers substances. For, since consciousness always accompanies thinking, and it is that which makes every one to be what he calls self, and thereby distinguishes himself from all other thinking things, in thisy oka alone consists personal identity, i.e. the sameness of a rational being: and as far as this consciousness can be extended backwards to any past action or thought, so far reaches the identity of that person; it is the same self now it was then; and it is by the same self with this present one that now reflects on it, that that action was done.
       - - Consciousness makes personal Identity. But it is further inquired, whether it be the same identical substance. This few would think they had reason to doubt of, if these perceptions, with their consciousness, always remained present in the mind, whereby the same thinking thing would be always consciously present, and, as would be thought, evidently the same to itself. But that which seems to make the difficulty is this, that this consciousness being interrupted always by forgetfulness, there being no moment of our lives wherein we have the whole train of all our past actions before our eyes in one view, but even the best memories losing the sight of one part whilst they are viewing another; and we sometimes, and that the greatest part of our lives, not reflecting on our past selves, being intent on our present thoughts, and in sound sleep having no thoughts at all, or at least none with that consciousness which remarks our waking thoughts,—I say, in all these cases, our consciousness being interrupted, and we losing the sight of our past selves, doubts are raised whether we are the same thinking thing, i.e. the same SUBSTANCE or no. Which, however reasonable or unreasonable, concerns not PERSONAL identity at all. The question being what makes the same person; and not whether it be the same identical substance, which always thinks in the same person, which, in this case, matters not at all: different substances, by the same consciousness (where they do partake in it) being united into one person, as well as different bodies by the same life are united into one animal, whose identity is preserved in that change of substances by the unity of one continued life. For, it being the same consciousness that makes a man be himself to himself, personal identity depends on that only, whether it be annexed solely to one individual substance, or can be continued in a succession of several substances. For as far as any intelligent being CAN repeat the idea of any past action with the same consciousness it had of it at first, and with the same consciousness it has of any present action; so far it is the same personal self. For it is by the consciousness it has of its present thoughts and actions, that it is SELF TO ITSELF now, and so will be the same self, as far as the same consciousness can extend to actions past or to come; and would be by distance of time, or change of substance, no more two persons, than a man be two men by wearing other clothes to-day than he did yesterday, with a long or a short sleep between: the same consciousness uniting those distant actions into the same person, whatever substances contributed to their production.
       - - Persons, not Substances, the Objects of Reward and Punishment.
       - - Consciousness alone unites remote existences into one Person.
       - - Person a forensic Term. -- for analysing cuases, assessing blame and reward

     2. What is a species?

     - Marx Species Being
     - Metabolism of life
     - - ||XXIV| We have still a third aspect of estranged labor to deduce from the two already considered.
     - - Man is a species-being [20], not only because in practice and in theory he adopts the species (his own as well as those of other things) as his object, but – and this is only another way of expressing it – also because he treats himself as the actual, living species; because he treats himself as a universal and therefore a free being.
     - - METABOLISM The life of the species, both in man and in animals, consists physically in the fact that man (like the animal) lives on organic nature; and the more universal man (or the animal) is, the more universal is the sphere of inorganic nature on which he lives. Just as plants, animals, stones, air, light, etc., constitute theoretically a part of human consciousness, partly as objects of natural science, partly as objects of art – his spiritual inorganic nature, spiritual nourishment which he must first prepare to make palatable and digestible – so also in the realm of practice they constitute a part of human life and human activity.
     - - BASIC NEEDS Physically man lives only on these products of nature, whether they appear in the form of food, heating, clothes, a dwelling, etc. The universality of man appears in practice precisely in the universality which makes all nature his inorganic body – both inasmuch as nature is (1) his direct means of life, and (2) the material, the object, and the instrument of his life activity. Nature is man’s inorganic body – nature, that is, insofar as it is not itself human body. Man lives on nature – means that nature is his body, with which he must remain in continuous interchange if he is not to die. That man’s physical and spiritual life is linked to nature means simply that nature is linked to itself, for man is a part of nature.
     - - In estranging from man (1) nature, and (2) himself, his own active functions, his life activity, estranged labor estranges the species from man. It changes for him the life of the species into a means of individual life. First it estranges the life of the species and individual life, and secondly it makes individual life in its abstract form the purpose of the life of the species, likewise in its abstract and estranged form.
     - - LIFE ENGENDERING LIFE --> BIRTH PROCESS For labor, life activity, productive life itself, appears to man in the first place merely as a means of satisfying a need – the need to maintain physical existence. Yet the productive life is the life of the species. It is life-engendering life. The whole character of a species, its species-character, is contained in the character of its life activity; and free, conscious activity is man’s species-character. Life itself appears only as a means to life.
     - - OBJECTIFICATION and INDIVIDUATION The animal is immediately one with its life activity. It does not distinguish itself from it. It is its life activity. Man makes his life activity itself the object of his will and of his consciousness. He has conscious life activity. It is not a determination with which he directly merges. Conscious life activity distinguishes man immediately from animal life activity. It is just because of this that he is a species-being. Or it is only because he is a species-being that he is a conscious being, i.e., that his own life is an object for him. Only because of that is his activity free activity. Estranged labor reverses the relationship, so that it is just because man is a conscious being that he makes his life activity, his essential being, a mere means to his existence.
     - - OBJECTS FROM INORGANIC NATURE In creating a world of objects by his personal activity, in his work upon inorganic nature, man proves himself a conscious species-being, i.e., as a being that treats the species as his own essential being, or that treats itself as a species-being. Admittedly animals also produce. They build themselves nests, dwellings, like the bees, beavers, ants, etc. But an animal only produces what it immediately needs for itself or its young. It produces one-sidedly, whilst man produces universally. It produces only under the dominion of immediate physical need, whilst man produces even when he is free from physical need and only truly produces in freedom therefrom. An animal produces only itself, whilst man reproduces the whole of nature.
     - - PLUSVALOR An animal’s product belongs immediately to its physical body, whilst man freely confronts his product. An animal forms only in accordance with the standard and the need of the species to which it belongs, whilst man knows how to produce in accordance with the standard of every species, and knows how to apply everywhere the inherent standard to the object. Man therefore also forms objects in accordance with the laws of beauty.
     - - DUPLICATES SELF, MITOSIS, DIALECTICAL MOMENT, OBJECTIVITY It is just in his work upon the objective world, therefore, that man really proves himself to be a species-being. This production is his active species-life. Through this production, nature appears as his work and his reality. The object of labor is, therefore, the objectification of man’s species-life: for he duplicates himself not only, as in consciousness, intellectually, but also actively, in reality, and therefore he sees himself in a world that he has created. In tearing away from man the object of his production, therefore, estranged labor tears from him his species-life, his real objectivity as a member of the species and transforms his advantage over animals into the disadvantage that his inorganic body, nature, is taken from him.
     - - Similarly, in degrading spontaneous, free activity to a means, estranged labor makes man’s species-life a means to his physical existence.
     - - The consciousness which man has of his species is thus transformed by estrangement in such a way that species[-life] becomes for him a means.
     - - Estranged labor turns thus:
     - - (3) Man’s species-being, both nature and his spiritual species-property, into a being alien to him, into a means of his individual existence. It estranges from man his own body, as well as external nature and his spiritual aspect, his human aspect.
     - - WHEN MAN CONFRONTS HIMSELF HE CONFRONTS THE OTHER MAN
     - - (4) An immediate consequence of the fact that man is estranged from the product of his labor, from his life activity, from his species-being, is the estrangement of man from man. When man confronts himself, he confronts the other man. What applies to a man’s relation to his work, to the product of his labor and to himself, also holds of a man’s relation to the other man, and to the other man’s labor and object of labor.
     - - In fact, the proposition that man’s species-nature is estranged from him means that one man is estranged from the other, as each of them is from man’s essential nature.
     - - OTHER MAN as CAPITALIST, vs SPECIES BEING (generality) The estrangement of man, and in fact every relationship in which man [stands] to himself, is realized and expressed only in the relationship in which a man stands to other men.
     - - Hence within the relationship of estranged labor each man views the other in accordance with the standard and the relationship in which he finds himself as a worker.
     - - Definition of species and species-being. Marxist context of 1844 manuscripts

1. Taxonomic charts
   > Obligatory hierarchy of ranks
   > animals plants
   > domain Eukaryota Eukaryota
   > kingdom Animalia Plantae
   > phylum Chordata Tracheophyta
   > class Mammalia Pteropsida
   > order Primates Coniferales
   > family Hominidae Pinaceae
   > genus Homo Pinus
   > species Homo sapiens (modern human) Pinus strobus (white pine)
1. question of evolution -- the persistence of life over time. how does it continue over time. what is life? is it just a biological process or is there seomthg prof9oudn that undergirds it. and that connects life to each other
1. how is life more than a mechanical process

- - early science question of mechanism, how things work together, how things are produced. what is the singular collisions of atoms and the consistency of consiosuness

6.  Aristotle

- - 1 - The Enduring Legacy of Aristotle: The Battle over Life as Self-Organization or (Genetic-Based) Reproduction
- - (1) the capacity to self-organize and maintain self-organization for an extended period of time against both external and internal perturbations and (2) the capacity to reproduce and (in light of Darwin’s theory of evolution) transmit to progeny adaptive characteristics.
- - As Aristotle argued, living things are not just fed, they feed themselves, and they are not just copied, they
    reproduce themselves. Characteristic O reflects this view in explicitly referring to the idea of self-organization. Similarly, characteristic R implicitly assumes that organisms contain an internal principle for generating organisms resembling themselves; external processes do not (like a 3D printer) duplicate them
- - In his most theoretical work in biology, De Anima (trans. Barnes 1984 and also Shields 2013; reprinted in Bedau and Cleland 2010), Aristotle discusses the nature of life, distinguishing living things from nonliving things in terms of functional capacities such as nutrition, reproduction, sensation or perception, locomotion, and thinking (De Anima Bks I and II). He identifies nutrition and reproduction as more basic than the others. For Aristotle, nutrition is not nutrients (food) but rather the internal capacity or “power”[dynamis, in ancient Greek] of
- - an organism to acquire (absorb), process (digest), and use nutrients for biological ends such as development, growth, maintenance, and repair; tellingly, he uses the terms “self-nutrition”and “nutrition”interchangeably in his writing

* - "spontaneous assembly" "emergence"
* - In contrast, the causal processes responsible for constructing and maintaining an organism are internal; organisms build and regenerate themselves.
* - teleological causation instead of the moment of birth
* - Aristotle postulated a special form of natural causation (De Anima Bk I). Living things are self-causing in the sense that they have internal regulative principles or “souls
* - But, while self-generated activities and goal-directed activities often coincide, they need not. In
* - All living things (plants and animals) share the most basic soul powers, (self-) nutrition and reproduction. In this context, it is important to distinguish Aristotle’s concept of reproduction from his notion of regeneration, which he would classify under nutrition because it involves the capacity of an existing organism to sustain and repair itself.
* - al than the other. In some passages he suggests that nutrition is more fundamental: “It follows that first of all we must treat of nutrition and reproduction, for the nutritive soul is found along with all the others and is the most primitive and widely distributed power of soul, being indeed that one in virtue of which all are said to have life
* - They proposed an alternative to vitalism that has come to be known as emergentism.

6.  Metabolism-Based Versus Evolution-Based Definitions of the Nature of Life

- - Metabolism-based definitions characterize life as a self-organizing system having the capacity to sustain itself against degrading processes for an extended period of time by extracting material, energy or information from its environment. The most popular metabolic definitions can be classified as chemical-metabolic, thermodynamic, or autopoietic. These categories correspond to different levels of abstraction, with chemical-metabolic definitions being the most closely tailored to the metabolic processes of familiar Earth life and autopoietic definitions being the furthest removed. On a chemically based metabolic definition, life is a chemical reaction system that sustains itself by extracting and transforming chemical energy from its environment (e.g.,
- - The concept of metabolism underlying metabolic definitions of life is strikingly similar to Aristotle’s notion of self-nutrition. Metabolic definitions emphasize the capacity of a living system to sustain itself as an “organized being”by extracting and processing “nutrients”(material, energetic, or even purely informational) found in its environment.

- - Metabolism-First Versus Genes-First Theories of the Origin(s) of Life Metabolism -- self organized forces of dynamic

7. Metabolism

- Aristotle's account of metabolism sought to explain how food was processed by the body to provide both heat and the materials for the body's construction and maintenance.

- Metabolism is the process by which your body converts what you eat and drink into energy. During this complex process, calories in food and beverages are combined with oxygen to release the energy your body needs to function.

- Decay and death

I IS WHAT I ATE

- Two component parts of metabolism:
- - Eating food -- each of these depend on the other. conversion of energy to human. eating as canibalism or murder. meat is murder.
- - Breathing air

Home as the place for this:

- Home as the locus of patriarchal institution
- Aristotle the idea of the oikos and the dominator
- Domus vs dominus -- the householder
- Our needs are what enslaves us in Arendt
- Engels on the origin of the state

e work of Emmanuel Levinas attempts to rethink the position of the individual self, reconsidering the way it is structured as a responsibility to the other person. Such an inquiry into selfhood necessarily raises the question of what is subsumed within the personal sphere, the suum. In his first magnum opus, Totality and Infinity, Levinas expresses this idea with a phrase borrowed from both Hegel and Sartre, writing that individual is ‘for-itself.’ “The subject is ‘for itself.’ It represents itself and knows itself as long as it is. But in knowing or representing itself, it possesses itself, dominates itself, extends its identity to what of itself comes to refute its identity” (87). Selfhood, Levinas explains, is not a stable identity but a process of self-identification, of appropriating the diversity of otherness and integrating it back into a unitary selfhood. Within Totality and Infinity, he delineates the steps by which this procedure occurs. Before the self involves itself in productive self-creation, he explains, its experience begins through consumption.

Levinas explains that the ego is first produced as something that enjoys existence. The ego is neither a particular instance of a universal category nor something that partakes of elemental forces or codes, but rather something that lives a contented life, living from its contents, fulfilling itself by filling itself. Levinas describes this initial relationship to the world using the metaphorical language of eating, stating “Nourishment … is the transmutation of the other into the same, which is in the essence of enjoyment: an energy that is other, recognized as other … becomes, in enjoyment, my own energy, my strength, me. All enjoyment is in this sense alimentation” (111). This description of the dynamic emergence of selfhood contrasts dramatically with the analyses of Hegel and Locke. For Hegel, particularity first develops through the exercise of freedom, by the way one expresses oneself through the externalization of one’s will in property. Although Locke begins with self-preservation and the biblical dispensation for enjoyment, it is productive labour that turns the world into one’s own. In contrast, Levinas explains that the self initially relates to the other through a process of incorporation and not externalization, through consumption and not production. By emphasizing consumption, Levinas seems to be drawing attention the way in which one begins one’s existence -- not as an agent asserting its sovereign will and projecting its spirit onto things but rather as someone vulnerable who needs to be sustained by the world in order to survive.

More than a reaction to either Locke or Hegel, Levinas’s emphasis on consumption seems to be a response to the way that Heidegger initially situates Dasein (human being). According to Heidegger, Dasein finds itself already thrown into a situation that surpasses it (174:135). Although this state of thrownness indicates certain susceptibility within its constitution, Dasein overcomes this passivity by recognizing how it is already engaged in the world. Dasein is already involved in a variety of productive relationships; it is related to things through relationships of utility that beckon to its hand. Once Dasein recognizes its engaged existence through the possessive relationships of mine-ness (Jemeinenigkeit) and authenticity / own-ness (Eigenlich), it can actively grasp things as they refer to it as ready-to-hand (Vorhanden), concerning itself by “producing, manipulating, and the like” (88) . According to Levinas, one first relates to the world through the mouth that eats rather than the hand that uses: man’s initial relationship is consuming the elemental rather than acting within Being. He remarks, “The consumption of foods is the food of life” (114). Therefore, he criticizes Heidegger's analysis for its overemphasis on productivity at the expense of consumption, remarking, "[Heidegger's model of the] world as a set of implements ... bears witness to a particular organization of labour in which foods take on the signification of fuel in the economic machinery. ... Dasein in Heidegger is never hungry" (134).

An anarchist mode of thinking must reverse the tradition of authoritarian thought in the most fundamental manner. Anarchism is typically defined simply as the refusal of the State. But the conceptual roots of the state are deeply rooted in Western thinking. In order to critique the modern state, one must additionally interrogate the foundation of the ancient polis and the tradition of political philosophy that has grown out of it. Political philosophy understands human sociality in terms of power relations and the determination of sovereignty. Might anarchism be able to offer a better, more ethical way of thinking?
I will argue that anarchism must consider a new model for human individual and social existence. Anarchism must contemplate the root of anarchy, a word derived from the Greek meaning without (an) rule (arche). What does it mean to forsake rulership, to abandon not only external authority but also to refuse the patterns of domination that structure one’s everyday mode of acting and thinking? How can one stop evaluating existence in terms of power and authority? In an effort to subvert the most basic assumptions and most fundamental paradigms of political philosophy, I will focus instead on how fundamental dependence and vulnerability are for the construction of human social and individual life.

The influence of this martial model can be detected in the way that various thinkers understand virtue as a matter of virility, focusing on traits like honor and glory. This bias is exemplified, for example, in Aristotle’s discussion of the first virtue of manliness, andreia, often translated as “courage” (Nic. 1115a5ff).

Queer Theory = Plato's Republic. The oikos is political

In contrast to the masculine sphere of the polis, the oikos (household) has typically been characterized as a feminine one, and has been deprecated by various political thinkers, most notably Aristotle. Unlike Plato who recommends the replacement of all familial bonds with purely political ones, Aristotle subordinates the oikos to the polis in several ways. He begins Ta Politika by explaining that both the oikos and the polis are forms of community (koinon). All forms of koinon aim towards the fulfillment of a certain end, and Aristotle argues that the polis is directed at a goal which is superior to that of the oikos (1251a1-10). In addition to this subordination, Aristotle makes the oikos subservient to the polis by encompassing it within a part-whole relationship, making the household one of the components of the city-state (1253a19-21). These two realms intersect within the person of the male citizen who is also the despotic patriarch of the household. Whereas Aristotle describes a variety of possible relationships within the polis, he only seems to recognize one for the community of the oikos. For him, the domestic sphere is ordered through relations of domination. This attitude is evident in his citation of Hesiod, “‘First and foremost a house and a wife and an ox for the ploughing’ — for the ox serves instead of a servant for the poor.” (1252b11-12). The analogy between the ox and the slave seems to indicate that what the domestic space provides is a site for domestication: a place in which the forces of untamed nature are subjected to human control. Thus, the slave seems quite literally to be a domesticated animal with human capacities. Although Aristotle clearly distinguishes the absolute rule over the slave from the royal rule over the child and the constitutional rule over the wife (1259b1-5), in all cases he asserts that the domestic space is a site for domination.

patriarcha?
In a similar vein, John Locke dedicates his first Treatise on Government to distinguishing the idea of free citizenship from the authority established from patriarchal descent, differentiating between familial relation and political obligation. As with Hobbes, Locke establishes a free political subject whose only significant obligations are with other free political subjects.

In order to think through the possibilities of the domestic in a meaningful way, I will turn to the work of feminist scholars such as Sarah Ruddick, Virginia Held, Joan Tronto, Eva Kittay, bell hooks, and Nancy Folbre. By reading these scholars, I hope to consider new models of human social existence. Counter to the inherited belief that political subjects are independent agents who are driven by courage, seeking glory, and looking for struggle, I will explore the idea that they are already dependent, sustained by networks of mutual support, giving care, and requiring nurturance. Held remarks, “Instead of starting with assumptions of isolated, self-seeking individuals accommodating to one another's competitive desires, or of contending economic classes overcoming their conflicts, one might, by starting with the assumptions of life-giving, nurturing beings, imagine entirely different ways of organizing society than are familiar to us.” (136) What would this consist of? Sarah Ruddick explains maternal practice as a way of taking responsibility for a child’s protection, nurturance, and training. Eva Kittay describes how fundamental is the experience of dependence for individual and social experience. bell hooks describes the home as a site for recovery and restoration, a space safe from the persecution of racism. Held and Tronto describe how care is constitutive for sociopolitical bonds. Nancy Folbre illustrates the social aspect of nurturance with a hypothetical example of how long it might take someone who was locked out of her house to borrow a phone from someone else. Such feelings of belonging, of being safe, of being part of a community, and of trusting one’s neighbors are crucial for human existence.  
I would like to use these feminist theorists as an opportunity to acknowledge and celebrate dependence. Authors such as Hannah Arendt understand dependency as a primordial violation of human freedom, as a subjection to a dominating power. I will argue that dependence does not necessarily entail degradation.

Perhaps the most distinctively human organ, the hand allows the human subject to grasp objects and relate them back to himself, revealing the world as an assemblage of things and the human person as a potential owner. John Locke’s Second Treatise on Government provides the classic expression of this modern orientation of possessive individualism, famously asserting:

It is useful to consider Locke’s analysis against the background of previous legal debates over the boundaries between one’s naturally given personal sphere (suum) and socially-sanctioned property ownership (dominion). In

Arguably the most important distinction within this text is whether or not human being (Dasein) resolves to live authentically. This term authentic is the English rendering of the German “eigenlich”, which translates literally as “eigen”, own and “lich”, like, or own-like.

In reaction to Heidegger’s metaphor of the hand as the organ through which one grasps worldly things and thereby seizes possibilities, Levinas argues that we first relate to the world through our mouths that eat the elements around us. Levinas therefore criticizes Heidegger for emphasizing production over consumption, stating that this model of the “world as a set of implements …. bears witness to a particular organization of labor in which foods take on the signification of fuel in the economic machinery. … Dasein in Heidegger is never hungry.” According to Levinas, one’s susceptibility to need and enjoyment precedes one’s capacity to manipulate.

Levinas reorganizes the embodied relationship to the world in his analysis of enjoyment. He explains that the ego is first produced as something that enjoys existence. It leads a contented life by living from its contents, fulfilling itself by filling itself. Whereas Locke believes that productive manipulation can externalize one’s embodied ownership, Levinas describes this initial relationship as one of consumption and incorporation. It is the process of eating, of nourishment and alimentation, that transmutes the other of the element into the substance of one’s self. The dynamic of food and hunger constitutes not just the sensuality of one’s own existence, but also one’s responsibility to the other person. According to Levinas, we recognize the destitution of the other as a hunger, and thus he quotes Rabbi Yochanan “To leave men without food is a fault that no circumstance attenuates.”

According to Aristotle, the oikos is the locus of oikonomos, the art of managing the household (1253b1-5.) He gives several answers about what this practice might entail. He explicitly states that oikonomos involves the management of property, of acquiring and producing wealth (1253b22-25). In addition, he gives another explanation of household practices, saying “The partnership therefore that comes about in the course of nature for everyday purposes (pasan emera) is the ‘house,’ the persons whom Charondas speaks of as ‘meal-tub-fellows’ and the Cretan Epimenides as ‘manger-fellows.’” (1252b12-16). Thus, Aristotle gives two definitions of economy, one relating to production and one relating to consumption. In this section, I will distinguish between these two models.
Part T

In his 1844 Manuscripts, Marx explains that humanity as a whole expresses its species-being through its labor, creating an objective representation of itself in the culture it produces. Capitalism disrupts this process of objectification by alienating the labor process. The worker does not just objectify but actually alienates his labor because its fruits are taken from him and given over to the capitalist. Marx explains, “The external character of labor for the worker appears in the fact that it is not his own, but someone else’s, that it does not belong to him, that in it he belongs, not to himself, but to another.”

The Marxist feminist goes a step further than the pure Marxist critique by focusing on how fundamental care is for human existence. Ultimately, our lives are not sustained by commodities but by the continuous sustenance we receive, what Aristotle refers to in the passage cited above on the household as what we need for our everyday purposes (pasan emera). Nevertheless, I still would fault these critiques for continuing to use the language of Marxism, for continuing to consider our interaction with the world in terms of production and of labor. While it is incredibly important to do so in order to maintain a critique of capitalist exploitation, it still does not fully appreciate the depth of our dependence. We do not simply reproduce the world, we are regenerated by it; we do not simply labor upon the world, we are sustained by it. Rather than discussing reproductive labor, we should be talking about regenerative sustenance.

I will begin my investigation by looking at the work of Peter Kropotkin. Kropotkin borrows much from Marx’s critique of property relationships but rather than focusing on the agency of production, he acknowledges the dependence of consumption. He highlights our debt to infinite others, stating, “Millions of human beings have labored to create this civilization on which we pride ourselves to-day. … There is not even a thought, or an invention, which is not common property, born of the past and the present.” Here Kropotkin is not pointing towards the fact of exploitation -- that we take the proceeds of someone else’s labor in an unfair manner -- but rather that, whatever we do, we are already indebted to other people.  
For this reason, he argues that it is wrong to focus on labor as the basis for a just society. He states
It is utterly impossible to draw a distinction between the work of each of these men. To measure the work by its results leads us to an absurdity; to divide the total work and to measure its fractions by the number of hours spent on the work also leads us to absurdity. One thing remains: to put needs above works, and first of all to recognize the right to live, and later on the right to well-being for all those who took their share in production.
He thus declares that the revolution must work towards the expropriation of what has been unjustly seized by the upper classes such that it can used to satisfy the right to well-being of all humanity. It must study the needs of humanity and the means by which they can be satisfied. Before proclaiming high minded ideals about how society should be ordered, the revolution must first make sure that all have adequate food and shelter. He thus declares that “With the Conquest of Bread, the Revolution will Triumph.”

ng “The origin of the city, then, in my opinion, is to be found in the fact that we do not severally suffice for our own needs (ouk autarkēs), but each of us lacks many things. Do you think any other principle (arkhēn) establishes (oikizein); the state (polin).” (369b). There are two things that

mind. First of all, Hannah Arendt argues that the occurrence of physical needs is our primordial experience of being dominated, and that it legitimates all further forms of domination. Second

. Second, it sometimes seems like it is shameful to discuss our human needs, that to do so would be to reveal our weakness and lack of autonomy. Instead of admitting to our needs, it is more acceptable for radical thinkers to discuss the liberation of our desires. This discourse, promulgated by situationists, queer theorists, Deleuzians and other post-Freudians, has been very important in liberating various gender identities and allowing for the expression of various sexualities

      The everyday process of breathing has an ethical profundity. During
                         the timespan of a breath, our egos are disrupted and we are opened
              to that which is other than ourselves. This can already be appreciated
              with a straightforward observation: 63 percent of my body is oxygen.
              Oxygen is not something that I merely use; it is something that I am;
              something that constitutes my substance. The oxygen that enters into
              me through my breathing becomes me, transforming from a part of
              the atmosphere into the person who I am. Not only was it once part
              of the ambient, this oxygen that is me in the present was other beings
                in the past, and will be others in the future. Through my breath, oth-
                erness invades and constitutes my very self.

      The everyday process of breathing has an ethical profundity. During
                         the timespan of a breath, our egos are disrupted and we are opened
              to that which is other than ourselves. This can already be appreciated
              with a straightforward observation: 63 percent of my body is oxygen.
              Oxygen is not something that I merely use; it is something that I am;
              something that constitutes my substance. The oxygen that enters into
              me through my breathing becomes me, transforming from a part of
              the atmosphere into the person who I am. Not only was it once part
              of the ambient, this oxygen that is me in the present was other beings
                in the past, and will be others in the future. Through my breath, oth-
                erness invades and constitutes my very self.

                   This essay investigates the ethical significance of breathing by
                comparing two meditations upon it. The first section considers the
                work of Emmanuel Levinas, examining the motif of la respiration in
                Otherwise than Being, or Beyond Essence. As Michael Marder states,
                “The hitherto unexplored reserves of breathing in the philosophy of
                Emmanuel Levinas contain a wealth of hermeneutical possibilities.”1
                The second section discusses the earliest Buddhist texts on mind-
                ful breathing, the Ānāpānasati Sutta. By placing these meditations against each other, by allowing them to open up to each other, we notice resonances in how they analyze the temporal structure and the ethical significance of this most common bodily activity. We conclude by asking a new question: once we understand the ethical significance of breathing, how does this make us responsible for the air itself ?

                I. O pening up to B reathing in T otality and I nfinity

Levinas develops the theme of breathing most earnestly in his sec- ond major work, Otherwise than Being. Because this volume so tightly packs together such hyperbolic metaphors,2 it is useful first to trace their emergence in his previous writings, most significantly in his first major work, Totality and Infinity. As a narrative whole, Totality and Infinity describes the moment-to-moment procession of time as the continuous creation and recreation of gendered generations: starting with the birth of the interior being, through that being’s getting married and settling into a house, to its getting a job and producing work, to its getting old and dying, yet ultimately relating to its future through the birth of a son.

Totality and Infinity describes the birth of an individual psyche
not as a simple event, but as a process of enjoying the world. Within
enjoyment, one finds one’s self submerged by the element, by the
pure density of sensual content. One then constitutes one’s interior
space by nourishing oneself from this medium. These descriptions of
the elemental medium, of nourishment, and of enjoyment’s temporal
dynamic must be considered in order to understand the subsequent
emergence of the motif of la respiration.
Levinas describes the birth of the moment as being immersed in
the element: one is always within it, bathed in its medium. Amid
these descriptions, Levinas first mentions the substance of breath-
ing, referring to the elemental medium as “wind, earth, sea, sky, air”
(TI 132). Although one’s relationship to the element is an individual
one, prior to the intersubjective relationship, Levinas indicates that
there is already an ethical aspect to it: he explores ethical responsibil-
ity through analyses of the face (le visage) of the other person and the
ethical face-to-face (face-à-face) relation; yet already, while discussing
the elemental, he refers to it as le face (translated by Lingis as “the side” [TI 131n]). Why does Levinas engage in such deliberate word- play? What is the ethical significance of the element?

Within the state of enjoyment, the self develops its own interi- ority, its separated psyche, in a process Levinas describes as “living from.” By employing the metaphors of alimentation and nourish- ment, Levinas indicates that the self constitutes its interiority by eat- ing, filling itself up with the content provided by the element. Within this discussion, Levinas also introduces the theme of breathing. Oddly, however, he fails to differ

For example, he claims: “Life does not consist in consuming the fuel furnished by breat\
hing and nourishment, but if we may so speak, in consummating terrestrial nourishments” (TI 114). Although the \
dynamic of “living from” reduces everything to the sameness of my egotistical interior- ity, here Levinas hints\
 at its ethical aspect: “In satiety the real I sank my teeth into is assimilated, the forces that were in the o\
ther become my forces, become me” (129). That is, there is already a certain alter-
ity within interiority. What is it?

                the element as the “pulsation of the I” (TI 113), as some sort of
                oscillating movement within oneself — or perhaps between the other-
                ness and sameness within oneself. Levinas describes the dynamism of
                this moment as a “becoming,” interpreting it through the most radi-
                cal reading of Heraclitus’s doctrine “everything flows” (panta rhei),
                calling sensibility “a becoming . . . radically opposed to the idea of
                being . . . the resistance to every integration expressed by the image of
                the river in which, according to Heraclitus one does not bathe twice,
                and according to Cratylus, not even once” (60).3 That is, the domi-
                nation of being is thwarted not just by the epiphany of the exterior    s
                other, but already within the dynamic beyond being of the psyche’s     es
                interior becoming.                                                     Pr


              character of respiration, the book also exalts its ordinariness. What
              makes this wonder of breathing even more remarkable for Levinas is
              that it is the most commonplace event in human life. He claims, “In
              human respiration, in its everyday equality, perhaps we have to already hear the breathlessness of . . . an inspiration by the other” (OB 181). Ethical experience, one’s responsibility toward other people, is not some supernatural event, some sudden epiphany that manifests only under special conditions. Instead, this remarkable ethical event of breathing is a component of each and all of our everyday experiences. It is something that forms the background of our every inhalation and exhalation, of our every action and reaction, of every moment of our existence.                   e

In order for this inspiration to occur, there must be an emptying
out of selfhood. The self exists not as a positive plentitude, but rather
as an emptiness, which opens itself to the invasion of the other. “To
revert to oneself is not to establish oneself at home. . . . It is always to
empty oneself anew of oneself ” (OB 92).7 One’s internal space is not
a locus for complacency, but always an emptiness in which to host
the other. According to Levinas, to remain unmoved within oneself
would not be an exertion of power, but instead it would be to be
trapped, constricted within one’s skin. One only escapes this state,
explains Levinas, because one is “forced to detach itself from itself, to breathe more deeply, all the way, forced to dispossess itself to the point of losing itself ” (110). The process of becoming, the invasion of other-in-the-self, occurs thanks to the emptiness of the self, because the self continuously detaches from itself — because it breathes.

Part 8: Levinas on Eating
It seems significant that, in his meditation on the home, Aristotle mentions two philosophers who describe it as the place where people eat together. Eating as the source of communality is a notion that is preserved in our everyday language. For example the term “companion” derives from the etymological root of sharing bread (pan) with (com) someone. Similarly, we employ the phrase “to break bread with” as a metaphor for communing with someone. In this section, I will look at Emmanuel Levinas’s phenomenology of eating in order to discover an economic practice based on consumption
In reaction to Heidegger’s metaphor of the hand as the organ through which one grasps worldly things and thereby seizes possibilities, Levinas argues that we first relate to the world through our mouths that eat the elements around us. Levinas reorganizes the embodied relationship to the world in his analysis of enjoyment. Levinas describes this initial relationship to the world using the metaphorical language of eating, stating “Nourishment … is the transmutation of the other into the same, which is in the essence of enjoyment: an energy that is other, recognized as other … becomes, in enjoyment, my own energy, my strength, me. All enjoyment is in this sense alimentation” (111). Here it is important to note that the French term for nourishment, nourissement, also signifies “nursing,” thus already indicating one’s dependence on a maternal element. Thus our initial relationship to the world is not production and externalization but consumption and incorporation. The dynamic of food and hunger constitutes not just the sensuality of one’s own existence, but also one’s responsibility to the other person.  
In Otherwise than Being, Levinas demonstrates that before it can appropriate external objects or confront the exteriority of the face, the self is already exposed, already open to otherness. Even before it identifies its property and its selfhood, the person is already directed by its responsibility to other people. Levinas explains this idea by exploring how sensible enjoyment and consumption are driven by ethical responsibility.  According to Levinas, there is already a hunger within this eating.  Although consciousness fulfills itself with contents, an underlying emptiness perpetually troubles this fullness. This emptiness indicates the presence of the other person’s absence, a proximity that splits me open, preventing me from possessing myself.  
This would suggest that, when we consume what the world offers, we are appropriating the remnants of others, incorporating their works and their actions as our own.  We are thus claimed by others from the inside; we are created as entities that are already responsible for the legacy that other persons have left behind. Just as one is already invaded from the inside by others, one’s own subjectivity is already delivered over to them. One’s own existence becomes transmuted; despite oneself, it is transformed into a substance for others. Levinas describes this as “a tearing away of the bread from one’s mouth to give to the other.”

    In her book The Death of Nature, Carolyn Merchant details how early modern thinkers like Francis Bacon described nature as a woman to be raped so that she would reveal her secrets to science.

Here, Locke’s analysis should be understood as a reaction to previous legal debates over the boundaries between one’s naturally given personal sphere (suum) and socially-sanctioned property ownership (dominion).

Therefore, he criticizes Heidegger's analysis for its overemphasis on productivity at the expense of consumption, remarking, "[Heidegger's model of the] world as a set of implements ... bears witness to a particular organization of labour in which foods take on the signification of fuel in the economic machinery. ... Dasein in Heidegger is never hungry" (134). That is, Levinas argues that Heidegger wrongly considers the human orientation towards the world as one of agency and manipulation, ignoring how it is already open to sensation and vulnerable to hunger.

Levinas explains that the ego is first produced as something that enjoys existence, that lives a contented life, living from its contents, fulfilling itself by filling itself. The self initially relates to the other through a process of incorporation and not externalization, through consumption and not production. Levinas describes this initial relationship to the world using the metaphorical language of eating, stating “Nourishment … is the transmutation of the other into the same, which is in the essence of enjoyment: an energy that is other, recognized as other … becomes, in enjoyment, my own energy, my strength, me. All enjoyment is in this sense alimentation” (111).

In order for the one to exercise a possessive relationship with the world, one must already have already been allowed a place within it. Although the human body is capable of labouring and acquiring property, it first finds itself immersed in the affectivity, hearing a rumble before recognizing the coming of the subway, bathed in intensive qualities rather than substantial objects. Without anything to hold onto, one can not form a relationship of ownership. According to Levinas, the affective element is “coming always without my being able to possess the source” (141). Ho

This would suggest that, when we consume what the world offers, we are appropriating the remnants of others, incorporating their works and their actions as our own. We are thus claimed by others from the inside; we are created as entities who are already responsible for the legacy that other persons have left behind. Levinas explains “There is a paradox in responsibility, in that I am obliged without this obligation having begun in me, as though an order slipped into my consciousness like a thief, smuggled itself in me” (13). As in Totality and Infinity, Levinas’s reference to the thief refers not to the act of taking away an external object, but of penetrating into an interior. In Otherwise than Being, Levinas pushes this metaphor even further, to assert that consumption animates one’s own identity from the inside as a responsibility towards others. Ultimately, this leads Levinas to conceive of selfhood as an absolute material generosity. “The subjectivity of a man of flesh and blood … is a being torn up from oneself for another in the giving to other of the bread from one’s mouth” (142).

Levinas

The work of Emmanuel Levinas attempts to rethink the position of the individual self, reconsidering the way it is structured as a responsibility to the other person. Such an inquiry into selfhood necessarily raises the question of what is subsumed within the personal sphere, the suum. In his first magnum opus, Totality and Infinity, Levinas expresses this idea with a phrase borrowed from both Hegel and Sartre, writing that individual is ‘for-itself.’ “The subject is ‘for itself.’ It represents itself and knows itself as long as it is. But in knowing or representing itself, it possesses itself, dominates itself, extends its identity to what of itself comes to refute its identity” (87). Selfhood, Levinas explains, is not a stable identity but a process of self-identification, of appropriating the diversity of otherness and integrating it back into a unitary selfhood. Within Totality and Infinity, he delineates the steps by which this procedure occurs. Before the self involves itself in productive self-creation, he explains, its experience begins through consumption.

Levinas explains that the ego is first produced as something that enjoys existence. The ego is neither a particular instance of a universal category nor something that partakes of elemental forces or codes, but rather something that lives a contented life, living from its contents, fulfilling itself by filling itself. Levinas describes this initial relationship to the world using the metaphorical language of eating, stating “Nourishment … is the transmutation of the other into the same, which is in the essence of enjoyment: an energy that is other, recognized as other … becomes, in enjoyment, my own energy, my strength, me. All enjoyment is in this sense alimentation” (111). This description of the dynamic emergence of selfhood contrasts dramatically with the analyses of Hegel and Locke. For Hegel, particularity first develops through the exercise of freedom, by the way one expresses oneself through the externalization of one’s will in property. Although Locke begins with self-preservation and the biblical dispensation for enjoyment, it is productive labour that turns the world into one’s own. In contrast, Levinas explains that the self initially relates to the other through a process of incorporation and not externalization, through consumption and not production. By emphasizing consumption, Levinas seems to be drawing attention the way in which one begins one’s existence -- not as an agent asserting its sovereign will and projecting its spirit onto things but rather as someone vulnerable who needs to be sustained by the world in order to survive.

More than a reaction to either Locke or Hegel, Levinas’s emphasis on consumption seems to be a response to the way that Heidegger initially situates Dasein (human being). According to Heidegger, Dasein finds itself already thrown into a situation that surpasses it (174:135). Although this state of thrownness indicates certain susceptibility within its constitution, Dasein overcomes this passivity by recognizing how it is already engaged in the world. Dasein is already involved in a variety of productive relationships; it is related to things through relationships of utility that beckon to its hand. Once Dasein recognizes its engaged existence through the possessive relationships of mine-ness (Jemeinenigkeit) and authenticity / own-ness (Eigenlich), it can actively grasp things as they refer to it as ready-to-hand (Vorhanden), concerning itself by “producing, manipulating, and the like” (88) . According to Levinas, one first relates to the world through the mouth that eats rather than the hand that uses: man’s initial relationship is consuming the elemental rather than acting within Being. He remarks, “The consumption of foods is the food of life” (114). Therefore, he criticizes Heidegger's analysis for its overemphasis on productivity at the expense of consumption, remarking, "[Heidegger's model of the] world as a set of implements ... bears witness to a particular organization of labour in which foods take on the signification of fuel in the economic machinery. ... Dasein in Heidegger is never hungry" (134).

Levinas describes several phenomenological transformations that respond to this dynamic of hunger. Part of this process entails the development of an economy in which personal property can exist. In itself, pure enjoyment does not engender any property ownership. Levinas employs the notion of the “elemental” to explain why this is so. Whereas Hegel finds a lack of will, a res nullis, within the natural world, Levinas describes it as permeated by anonymous elemental forces. Qualities without substances content sensible enjoyment. For example, Levinas states that one enjoys the “blue of the sky” (141). Here, he seems to be claiming that affectivity responds to the adjectival blue rather than a nominal thing such as the ideal of blueness, or the particular object described by blue, the sky. Affect responds to intensities, not to objects. Thus, Levinas states that these elements are “coming always without my being able to possess the source” (141). That is, within sensibility, one does not find concrete things which could be seized as property. Furthermore, Levinas explains enjoyment as a passive process, in which one is affected, undergoing waves of sensation. Levinas thus claims that ownership is ambiguous within this realm, writing “to possess by enjoying is also to be possessed” (158). In order for private property to emerge, the relationship of enjoyment must be transformed into a new configuration, a phenomenon which Levinas calls the Home.

Levinas's notion of the Home seems to be an adaptation of Heidegger's description of how the individual relates to the world. In Being and Time, Heidegger argues that the self is not separated from things as a subject is from an object, but is already engaged in the world. According to Heidegger, the reason why Dasein is always already in a productive, manipulative relationship with the world is because it is always already “dwelling alongside” the world (54:80ff). Levinas's discussion of the "Home" seems to indicate his ironic critique of this idea. For Levinas, the Home is precisely the event that terminates engagement, separating the individual from the immediacy of his enjoyment. “Man abides in the world as having come to it from a private domain, from being at home with himself, in which at each moment that he retires” (152). Emerging from the welcome granted to him by an other person's hospitality, the home establishes a private being, walled off from the anonymity of sensible elements.

By situating oneself inside the private realm of one’s domicile, one can relate the outside world back to oneself, laying claim to things within it as one’s property. This home enables labour and possession by creating a breach between the self and the elements in which it had been absorbed. Through this distance, one can exercise the power of a labouring hand which exercises labour and identifies property. Overcoming the transience of sensual affect, the hand draws from the element concrete things, objects that endure through time. In many ways, Levinas’s description of how property is acquired echoes Hegel’s notion that possession negates the independence of the thing (§59): “labour in its possessive grasp suspends the independence of the element… as property the thing is an existent that has lost its being” (158). For Levinas as for Hegel, possession entails the absolute domination of the property by the owner.

According to Levinas, my encounter with the other person prevents the spread of this domination. This transcendental experience of confronting another person is not akin either to sensual enjoyment or to masterful possession. The other person is an exterior entity, someone that cannot be absorbed into my internal sphere or made into part of my identity. However, this encounter is not experienced as a negative limit but rather as a something that is overly positive. The other person, according to Levinas, is not something that eludes the grasp of possession but someone who overwhelms it. In this experience, he claims, “the I, nonetheless, contains in itself what it can neither contain nor receive solely by virtue of its own identity” (27). Envisioning the other person’s visage, one’s mind is confronted with a paradoxical experience of containing more than its capacity, something that could not have come from consciousness itself and that consciousness can not integrate into the self’s own identity. When the other person expresses herself, she produces an image or a work that can be appropriated, yet simultaneously she also expresses a transcendence that cannot be dominated. However she presents herself, she both preserves her own privacy and maintains the ability to respond in unforeseeable ways. According to Levinas, the other person transcends not just the self’s power, but its power for power (198). The only way that one could attempt to exercise absolute power over another person, to appropriate them as property, would be to murder them. However, murder would grant one possession of only a corpse, not the person herself.

The encounter with the other person alters the self’s intimate relationship to the world it possesses and allows for the emergence of a common sphere. Complementing the phenomenology of the Home, Levinas describes another process that conditions ownership, the genesis of the general. He explains that, because the other person halts the self’s effort to appropriate, it both throws property into question and conditions it. “Possession itself refers to more profound metaphysical relations: a thing does not resist acquisition. Other possessors – those whom one cannot possess – contest and therefore can sanction possession itself” (162). The presence of other persons challenges my immediate enjoyment of goods, and removes me from my solitary experience of them. Paradoxically, however, this same interaction also allows for the establishment of property. In order for appropriation to occur, a subject must be counterposed against a field of objects. According to Levinas, one achieves this separation by presenting oneself and one’s goods to the outside gaze of the visage, to the other person’s vision. “In order that I be able to see things in themselves, that is, represent them to myself, refuse both enjoyment and possession, I must know how to give what I possess” (171). According to Levinas, I become aware of the general sphere once I generously offer my world to the other person.

With this analysis, Levinas’s account of the commons differs dramatically from Locke and Hegel. Although Locke believes that the world was given to man in common, only the negative duty to avoid injuring others remains after creation. Since the right to existence and the right to property are individuated, generality can only emerge from a consent reached between separated persons pursuing their own ends. On the other hand, Hegel understands the universal order of the state as that which already conditions the substantial objectification of the particular person. In contrast, Levinas asserts that I move from my own solitary enjoyment to the common world through communicating with the other person and entering into commerce with him. Levinas’s analysis of the commons seems to be preferable than that of Locke, who treats the commons either as a something natural that should be privatized or as the epiphenomenal outcome of aggregated interests. The contrast between Hegel and Levinas, the question of whether we move from the general to the interpersonal or the interpersonal to the general, is much more subtle. Here it seems worth noting, though, that within The Philosophy of Right, Hegel only seems to consider the logical categories of particularity and universality. He has no comparable term for alterity, no way to discuss the unique phenomenon of the other person, as he did in the Phenomenology of Spirit.

For Levinas, the realm of generality is populated not by property or by objects, but by works. Labour not only incorporates things into my existence, it also produces a thing exterior to myself, a work, a thing that attests to the absence of the worker. Levinas uses this notion of the work to argue against Locke and Hegel's assertion that labour creates property. “The product of labour is not an inalienable possession, and it can be usurped by the Other. Works have a destiny independent of the I, are integrated into an ensemble of works: they can be exchanged, that is, be maintained in the anonymity of money” (176). Whereas Hegel explained how property expresses the self by the way it embodies the human will, Levinas insists that the work expresses the will as something from which the will has removed itself. Production for Levinas does not expand the personal sphere, but rather creates something external to it, something that can be expropriated and manipulated by other wills. For Levinas, my labour not only secures what belongs to me, but also situates those expressions of myself in a general economy where they can be appropriated by anyone. Therefore, the very act of self-assertion and self-manifestation is already a primary exposure and self-alienation. “The other can dispossess me of my work, take it or buy it, and thus direct my very behaviour; I am exposed to instigation. The work is destined to this alien Sinngebung [meaning-giving] from the moment of its origin in me” (227).

Levinas describes the reverse process in a manner that further complicates the idea of ownership. Just as our absence is signalled in the ways that we express ourselves in our works, we also appropriate absences through our acquisitions. The other person, Levinas explains, is symbolized through the way that he has expressed himself in his works. Thus, I can acquire a certain kind of access to him through the way the person has expressed himself, but, Levinas explains, “we penetrate into this interior world as by burglary” (177). Levinas’s metaphor of burglary seems particularly striking in this discussion of property. As mentioned before, the primary threat against which Locke’s treatise defends is that of robbery: because the primary right of individuals is to promote their own self-interest, any infraction upon this privilege legitimates severe retribution. In contrast, Levinas’s describes how property is already theft: property is already situated in a public realm, and thus already subject to the economic dynamics of dispossession. More strikingly, Levinas’s example reconstrues the notion of thievery and the way it affects the personal sphere. For Levinas, the thief does not represent someone who takes property away from the sphere of selfhood, the suum, but rather someone who penetrates into it.

Levinas further explores the susceptibility of the personal sphere in his second major book, Otherwise than Being. Otherwise than Being reworks the conceptual architecture of Totality and Infinity, focusing more closely on how the personal sphere develops from its responsibility to other persons. According to Levinas, the Western idea of selfhood is based on the idea that the self can possess itself through an act of identification. “In self-consciousness we identify ourselves across the multiplicity of temporal phases. It is as though subjective life in the form of consciousness consisted in being itself losing itself and finding itself again so as to possess itself by showing itself, proposing itself as a theme, exposing itself in truth” (99). In this statement, Levinas seems to be locating the problem of self-consciousness in what he refers to in an early essay as Heraclitus’s problem of the “illusory present” (“Reflections,” 65). Given that everything changes through the dynamic flux of time, how could one ever posit a stable identity for a thing such as the self? If one is always changing, isn’t the self already dispersed in otherness? Levinas claims that philosophy has consistently tried to resolve these problems by developing ways that one can integrate this diversity. It has proposed various themes through which one can grasp phenomena, allowing one to convert the external other into internal property and thereby establish self-possession.

Levinas challenges the authority of these thematic organizing principles by demonstrating that before consciousness can appropriate the ex-ternal, the self is already ex-posed, already open to otherness. From the very beginning, the suum is already directed by its responsibility to other people. Otherwise than Being explains this prior exposure by clarifying one of the most puzzling aspects of Totality and Infinity: how is the “other” related to the “Other.” Totality and Infinity had presented two stages of the self’s development. First, the self emerges by integrating the “other” into the same, creating the identity of the self. Secondly, the self relates to the human “Other” as a transcendental entity that can not be appropriated. In Otherwise than Being, Levinas looks more carefully at the first stage of this process, explaining how sensible enjoyment and consumption is already ethical. Within sensibility, the self does not yet exist as a self-sufficient entity. As in Totality and Infinity, Levinas explains that consumption is the process by which the self achieves its identity. “The taste is the way a sensible subject becomes a volume, or the irreducible event in which the spatial phenomenon of biting becomes the identification called me, which becomes me through the life that lives from its very life” (73). Levinas argues that within this eating there is already a hunger that drives it. Whereas consciousness is driven to fulfill itself with contents, there is an underlying emptiness that perpetually troubles this fullness. According to Levinas, this emptiness indicates the presence of the other person’s absence. “The relationship with the other puts me into question, empties of myself and empties me without end, showing me ever new resources. I didn’t know I was so rich, but I no longer have the right to keep anything for myself” (“Meaning”, 94). One’s responsibility towards the other splits me open, preventing me from isolating myself as a self-sufficient, self-possessed identity. Levinas describes this process as an inversion and reversal of consumption: eating not only creates identity by internalizing the outside; it is also a “gnawing away at this very identity – identity gnawing away at itself – in a remorse” (OTB, 114).

According to Levinas, the phenomenology of sensibility indicates an underlying vulnerability and exposedness to other persons. In contrast to Totality and Infinity’s claim that the self could be characterized as “for itself,” Levinas describes it in Otherwise than Being as a “for-the-other.” The very movement of incorporating otherness is also equivalent to being haunted by others already within oneself. The self is already committed to others before it is concerned with itself: it is exposed, posited in an external space filled with the wills of others. In Totality and Infinity, Levinas explained that the sphere of generality was comprised by works that testified to the absent wills of other people. This would suggest that, when we consume what the world offers, we are appropriating the remnants of others, incorporating their works and their actions as our own. We are thus claimed by others from the inside; we are created as entities who are already responsible for the legacy that other persons have left behind. Levinas explains “There is a paradox in responsibility, in that I am obliged without this obligation having begun in me, as though an order slipped into my consciousness like a thief, smuggled itself in me” (13). As in Totality and Infinity, Levinas’s reference to the thief refers not to the act of taking away an external object, but of penetrating into the interior. In Otherwise than Being, Levinas pushes this metaphor even further, to assert that consumption animates one’s own identity from the inside as a responsibility towards others.

With this understanding of the world, Levinas helps us to reconsider and perhaps to overcome the prominence that the notion of private property has assumed in this moment of history. Levinas does so by reconsidering the notions of self, world, and other upon which are founded the ideology of possessive individualism and the institution of ownership, as well as the theories of both Hegel and Locke. In both of these writers, (1) the self is understood as an agent who exercises his labour to extend his sphere of selfhood; and (2) the world is understood as an empty vessel awaiting animation by the human will. Locke and Hegel do differ significantly with regard to their views on other people. Locke practically ignores social duties, whereas Hegel shows how universal social concerns always limit individual actions. Nevertheless, even Hegel argues that the particularity of each individual’s capacities and resources counterbalance the general right to social welfare, thereby sanctioning inequities in property ownership and modes of subsistence. In contrast, Levinas does not understand the world as merely an empty field awaiting human agency. For Levinas, the world is already occupied, haunted by the efforts of past generations of workers. The self begins its existence not as a productive labourer but as a consumer already enjoying the environment that others have created. Whereas Levinas’s viewpoint seems to be a vast improvement over both Locke and Hegel’s, he still shares a blind spot with the two of them. All three writers seem excessively humanist: for all of them, what matters the most in the world is the presence of human wills, either the self’s or the other person’s or society’s. The natural world itself exerts no significant claim on its own behalf. For this reason, we still need to consider what sorts of new ethical thinking will be adequate to respond to the environmental challenges confronting our planet today.

Conclusion

By analysing the primary encounter between self and world as one of consumption rather than production, Levinas becomes interesting for modern political-economic thought. He dislodges the central category of property ownership, conceiving selfhood as an absolute generosity. “The subjectivity of a man of flesh and blood … is a being torn up from oneself for another in the giving to other of the bread from one’s mouth” (142). Although Levinas’s hyperbolic language is rhetorically radical, it is not entirely clear the extent to which it can be read as being politically radical. Despite Levinas’s occasional references to Marx and his philosophical usage of the term “anarchy,” he still seems to support politically the “pathos of liberalism” (TI, 120). Nevertheless, this paper will conclude by trying to push Levinas’s thought in a more revolutionary direction. This will be done by analysing how this essay’s themes of property, production, and consumption are discussed by the Peter Kropotkin in his seminal declaration of anarchocommunism, The Conquest of Bread.

Kropotkin criticizes the idea of property ownership because, like Levinas, he understands the world to be constituted by the works of other people. Thus, Kropotkin argues that no individual can lay claim to any particular object because the value of each thing depends on the efforts of an incalculable number of others. “And even to-day; the value of each dwelling, factory, and warehouse, which has been created by the accumulated labour of the millions of workers, now dead and buried, is only maintained by the very presence and labour of legions of the men who now inhabit that special corner of the globe” (6). According to Kropotkin, property claims are impossible because one’s existence already depends upon an infinite debt to others. The world within which one acts is already constituted by the historical deeds of past workers; one’s actions only become significant because they occur within a contemporary environment where other people currently labour.

Given that everyone’s personal effort depends radically upon the efforts of others, Kropotkin further argues that ownership claims cannot be based on labour. Here, his claim is quite different from the critique of private property levelled by Karl Marx. In Although Marx’s early “humanist” writings are quite concerned with social needs (Heller, 40), his later critique of capitalism focuses more intensely on the inequity of social production, on an analysis of how the capitalist extracts surplus value from the labourer. In Capital, Marx roots the source of social value in human labour. In the first chapter, he claims that the total labour power of society can be divided into discrete units of average labour expended in a given hour (129), further distinguishing between simple and skilled labour. Kropotkin objects that Marxists and other collectivists place too much emphasis on determining the appropriate value of various kinds of labour. Thus, he argues:

It is utterly impossible to draw a distinction between the work of each of these men. To measure the work by its results leads us to an absurdity; to divide the total work and to measure its fractions by the number of hours spent on the work also leads us to absurdity. One thing remains: to put needs above works, and first of all to recognize the right to live, and later on the right to well-being for all those who took their share in production. (231)

Rather than focusing on labour, ownership, and production, Kropotkin asserts that people should organize themselves in such a way as to satisfy the human needs of consumption.

Kropotkin criticizes the tradition of political economy from Adam Smith to Marx for consistently commencing their analyses with production rather than consumption. He defends his own decision to reverse the order by explaining

Perhaps you will say [putting production before consumption] is logical. Before satisfying needs you must create the wherewithal to satisfy them. But before producing anything, must you not feel the need of it? Is it not necessity that first drove man to hunt, to raise cattle, to cultivate land, to make implements, and later on to invent machinery? Is it not the study of needs that should govern production? It would therefore be quite as logical to begin by considering needs and afterwards to discuss the means of production in order to satisfy these needs (238).

Our capacity to produce, he claims, is sufficient to produce well-being for all, enough housing, clothing, luxury items, and food. The thing that prevents people from meeting their needs is the exploitation practiced within the contemporary system of private ownership, a system that reduces the majority of people to the barest subsistence. Instead of allowing this economic system to legitimate itself with the alibi that it practices efficient production, Kropotkin argues that we must begin by considering consumption. Society, he declares could only hope to meet the needs of all if it returns to the most fundamental question, the question of bread. “We have the temerity to declare that all have a right to bread, that there is enough bread for all, and that with this watchword of Bread for All the revolution will triumph” (69).

heller needs
First, let us examine use value. Marx defines the commodity as use value in the following way: “A commodity is … a thing that by its properties satisfies human needs of some sort or another.”1 In

marx labor power vs labor
labor power is living labor power, dynamic force. labor is an object

vampire

fellow worker is an equal. other is symmetrical relations of equality. the inequality and imbalances in all relating

Domination by needs in Arendt
With the term vita activa, I propose to designate three fundamental
human activities: labor, work, and action
Labor is the activity which corresponds to the biological process
of the human body, whose spontaneous growth, metabolism, and
eventual decay are bound to the vital necessities produced and fed
into the life process by labor. The human condition of labor is life
itself.
This prerequisite
of freedom ruled out all ways of life chiefly devoted to keeping
one's self alive—not only labor, which was the way of life of the
slave, who was coerced by the necessity to stay alive and by the
rule of his master, but also the working life of the free craftsman
and the acquisitive life of the merchant. I

Thomas Aquinas: homo est natu-
raliter politicus, id est, socialis ("man is by nature political, that is,
social"). 2 More than any elaborate theory, this unconscious sub-
stitution of the social for the political betrays the extent to whic

. The
natural, merely social companionship of the human species was
considered to be a limitation imposed upon us by the needs of bio-
logical life, which are the same for the human animal as for other
forms of animal life.
According to Greek thought,
cording to Greek thought, the human capacity for political
organization is not only different from but stands in direct oppo-
sition to that natural association whose center is the home (oikiri)
and the family. The rise of the city-state meant that man received
"besides his private life a sort of second life, his bios politikos.

despotic powers, or of life in the barbarian empires of Asia,
whose despotism was frequently likened to the organization of the
household.'

y contradiction. 18
The distinctive trait of the household sphere was that in it men
lived together because they were driven by their wants and needs.
The driving force was life itself—the penates, the household gods,
were, according to Plutarch, "the gods who make us live and
nourish our body" 19 —which, for its individual maintenance and
its survival as the life of the species needs the company of others.
That individual maintenance should be the task of the man and
species survival the task of the woman was obvious, and both of
these natural functions, the labor of man to provide nourishment
and the labor of the woman in giving birth, were subject to the
same urgency of life. Natural community in the household there-
fore was born of necessity, and necessity ruled over all activities
performed in it.
The realm of the polls, on the contrary, was the spher
e realm of the polls, on the contrary, was the sphere of free-
dom, and if there was a relationship between these two spheres, it

hat all Greek philosophers, no matter how opposed to polls
life, took for granted is that freedom is exclusively located in the
political realm, that necessity is primarily a prepolitical phenome-
non, characteristic of the private household organization, and that
force and violence are justified in this sphere because they are the
only means to master necessity—for instance, by ruling over
slaves—and to become free. Because all human beings are subject
to necessity, they are entitled to violence toward others; violence
is the prepolitical act of liberating oneself from the necessity of
life for the freedom of world. This freedom is the essential condi-
tion of what the Greeks called felicity, eudaimmla, which was an
objective status depending first of all upon wealth and health. To
be poor or to be in ill health meant to be subject to physical nece
s freedom is the essential condi-
tion of what the Greeks called felicity, eudaimmla, which was an
objective status depending first of all upon wealth and health. To
be poor or to be in ill health meant to be subject to physical neces-
sity, and to be a slave meant to be subject, in addition, to man-
made violence. This twofold and doubled "unhappiness" of slavery
is quite independent of the actual subjective well-being of the slave.
Thus, a poor free man preferred the insecurity of a daily-changing
labor market to regular assured work, which, because it restricted
his freedom to do as he pleased every day, was already felt to be
servitude (douleia), and even harsh, painful labor was preferred to
the easy life of many household slaves. 20

The polls was distinguished from the household in that it knew
only "equals," whereas the household was the center of the strict-
est inequality. To be free meant both not to be subject to the
necessity of life or to the command of another and not to be in
command oneself. It meant neither to rule nor to be ruled
This functionalization makes it
impossible to perceive any serious gulf between the two realms;
and this is not a matter of a theory or an ideology, since with the
rise of society, that is, the rise of the "household" (oikia) or of
economic activities to the public realm, housekeeping and all mat-
ters pertaining formerly to the private sphere of the family have
become a "collective" concern. 24 In the modern world, the two
realms indeed constantly flow into each other like waves in the
never-resting stream of the life process itself

he private realm and the modeling of all human
relationships upon the example of the household reached far into
the specifically medieval professional organizations in the cities
themselves, the guilds, confreries, and compagnons, and even into
the early business companies, where "the original joint household
would seem to be indicated by the very word 'company' icmn-
panis) . . . [and] such phrases as 'men who eat one bread,' 'men
who have one bread and one wine.' " 28 The medieval concept of
the "common good," far from indicating the existence of a politi-
cal realm, recognizes only that private individuals have interests
in common, material and spiritual, and that they can retain their
privacy and attend to their own business only if one of them takes
it upon himself to look out for this common interest. What dis-
tinguishes this essentially Christian attitude toward

virtue ethics, manly ethics
quality. It was "good" to the extent that by having mastered the
necessities of sheer life, by being freed from labor and work, and
by overcoming the innate urge of all living creatures for their
own survival, it was no longer bound to the biological life process

reactionary conservative hatred of mass culture,
Society is the form in which the fact of mutual depend-
ence for the sake of life and nothing else assumes public signifi-
cance and where the activities connected with sheer survival are
permitted to appear in public.

The Home as Welcome Itself
First of all, Levinas can be understood as subverting gender norms.  Levinas describes the production of the home as “welcome in itself – the feminine being” (157.)  If Levinas here characterizes feminine alterity by the “welcome” it offers, then we can only conclude that the ethical subject is figured as a woman a few pages later.  “I welcome the Other who presents himself in my home by opening my home to him” (171.)  In fact, my identification as a welcoming woman is the very basis of Levinasian ethics, as “metaphysics, transcendence, the welcoming of the other by the same” (43.)  Even though Levinas’s equation of the feminine with the domestic is problematic, his characterization of ethical subjectivity and ethics itself as feminine already undermines the Western tradition of patriarchal domination.

Secondly, Levinas can be understood as not only subverting the dominance of the masculinity, but also his conception of the home can be understood as subversion of the political itself.  That is, I would respond to the often-asked question in Levinas’s scholarship, “how can his ethics be turned into a program for politics”, with the response that we should instead investigate the home as a model for human sociality.  Levinas breaks with the heroic fantasy of Western patriarchy that defines the citizen as someone who has (1) individuated himself away from the domestic sphere, and (2) united with other individuals within the political sphere.  In contrast to this, Levinas’s analysis of the home demonstrates how we are always already dependent upon the domestic welcome of an Other and always already responsible for providing domestic welcomes for other Others.

SELF-ORGANIZATION
Heidegger rearticulates the deprecation of the feminine locus of the house in hiw wartime writings. In Introduction to Metaphysics, Heidegger elaborates his characterization of the Greek concept of Being, physis, as the self-blossoming emergence of Being, as something that manifests through the dynamics of violence, power, and struggle. According to Heidegger, however, this conception became corrupted as it drifted away from its Greek root. He explains, “This basic Greek word for essent is commonly translated as ‘nature.’ This derives from the Latin translation, natura, which properly means ‘to be born,’ ‘birth.’ But with this Latin translation the original meaning of the Greek word physis is thrust aside, the actual philosophical force of the Greek word is destroyed.” Exemplifying Nancy Hartsock’s critique of heroism, this quote displays the degree to which Heidegger refuses to accept the reality of human birth, the fact that all created beings are fundamentally dependent. The notion of a self-emerging, self-manifesting physis seems like a strange male fantasy of independence. Heidegger refuses to accept the dynamics of creation, that being is not self-emergent but always dependent upon an other that brings it forth.  
 He interprets the polis as emerging out of the Greek articulation of Being itself. He asserts that physis, the self-standing and self-emerging, is equivalent to logos, the gathering together of the gathered, and that the polis is the site in which this gathering-together occurs. He further remarks, “Polis means, rather, the place, the there (Da), wherein and as which historical being-there (Dasein) is.” That is, the very place where human existence occurs, the very Da of one’s Dasein is defined to be the polis. The polis is thus deemed the space where authentic human emergence can take place; where poets can actually be poets, priests can actually be priests, and rulers can actually be rulers. Heidegger explains his usage of the copula, stating la: “Be, but this means: as violent men to use power, to become preeminent in historical being as creators, as men of action.”

BIRTH NON CHOSEN
  In contrast, Levinas remarks that “the idea of causa sui … is belied by birth, non-chosen and impossible to choose … which situates the will in an anarchic world, that is, a world without origin.”

The Home in bell hooks
why the interbeing is a separation
. In addition to reconsidering the importance of maternal care, other feminist thinkers have similarly re-evaluated the category of domestic nurturance. For example, bell hooks discusses how black women maintained what she calls ‘home place’ as a site of resistance against rampant racism, a refuge where people could gather and heal themselves from the wounds inflicted by a hostile society (2001, pp. 41–9).

Also a communion of needs, the companion, in aristotle the meal tub fellows.

Birth as different process of generation. A connection to other people as through a family, something volutary and involuntary connection with other people.

And other peoplea se tending to our needs
through the worker the person externalizes himself and through the abstraction of their labor
in birth and practice of mothering through the substanc eof the human body itself  
levinas and materiality and a temporality

Mitchell The gist of the distinction I was trying to make was between the list of good things alternate caregivers may do (e.g., defending a child against an attacker) that you had provided and the idea that such caregivers’ involvement in a child’s life may reduce the likelihood of a child being subject to coercive treatment, even by other caregivers…the idea being I can imagine a protective-yet-coercive grandparent and yet there is empirical evidence that maybe the cooccurrence of coercion and that kind of protection is…not as common as their decoupling.

The domus as feast locus with dom as loafward harkens back to readings about the closure of the commons and prior transition to grain-based diets. Prompts me to reconsider the potential power of events like the block party or church social…looking through the questionable etymological link between potluck and potlatch.

On Sat, Jun 25, 2022 at 10:32 PM Mitchell Verter <mitchell.verter@gmail.com> wrote:
So what's really so interesting about Sarah Hrdy's argument is that it takes place against the background of familial violence, specifically infanticide -- the grandmother is lauded for her fearless defense of the baby against male violence. Hrdy does mention some formula for formula for calculating social bonds from capacity for survival. I don't know how a mathematical reduction would affect the argument. In any case I don't understand the distinction between these "some of the behaviors you indicated seemed less relational (how we treat each other) and more motivated by relation (defending you against an attacker/illness because you're my grandkid...and maybe I let the attacker's grandkid wither)"

As far as the family and domination: yes, exactly the patriarchal family is constructed as such. Domus = home, as in domicile; but also Dom = domination. The Dominator is the ruler of the home. But this definition of the home as a locus for domination also lies alongside the definition of the home as a place where needs are met, where things are eaten, where the metabolism of life occurs:

From an old paper:
"Not only does Aristotle claim that the home is encompassed within the state, but he also intersects these two communal spheres in the figure of the patriarch, who establishes his dominion over the domestic sphere through a process of domination and domestication, and who establishes the science of oikonomos (economy) to order the household and to acquire property (1996, 1253b1ff). However, Aristotle supplements this patriarchal analysis of the household with a secondary definition. The household is not simply the locus of domination, but more fundamentally, it is the association where people come together to attend to their everyday needs and wants, the communal space where people become companions through the activity of eating together (Aristotle, 1996, 1252b12–20)."

On Sat, Jun 25, 2022 at 10:48 AM Ben Blohowiak <ben.blohowiak@gmail.com> wrote:
Hey Mitchell I think I smell what you're cookin and FWIW there is a body of empirical research that isn't explicitly coded as anarchist that may be of interest.

It talks about things like "coercive family processes" and "the coercive cycle" (which may have mappings to that undefined menace, domination) in contrast to practices more consistent with prosocial relations, flourishing, etc. [Disclaimer: a bunch of this research is couched in terms of social control in the literature, i.e., funding sources want an answer to "how do 'we' prevent infants from becoming criminals?", though findings may have more general applicability.]
Relations of coercion within family systems prompt some of my concerns regarding non-state or informal hierarchy. Also, the idea that state systems "roll their shit downhill" such that familial relations tend toward coercion may be an oversimplification that nevertheless indicates a role played by economic and political context in shaping familial interactions such that child and caregiver flourishing/freedom is damaged in a way that tends to reproduce intergenerationally (incarceration, impoverishment, etc.).

I'd need to search for pertinent publications, but I recall anecdotally from my time in the field and in discussions with colleagues that the involvement of so-called alternate caregivers (usually "grandparents") in children's lives tends to correlate inversely with coercive caregiving practices--even those of a primary, non-alternate caregiver--and positively with indicators of child well-being. I'm not sure how much of that may be attributed to a self-selection bias at play (e.g., I get along with my dad because he wasn't awful so now both of us aren't going to be awful to my kid) or how much may be attributed to resource sufficiency (e.g., I might not take as many coercive shortcuts if I had a little help with this kid), but some of the behaviors you indicated seemed less relational (how we treat each other) and more motivated by relation (defending you against an attacker/illness because you're my grandkid...and maybe I let the attacker's grandkid wither). So there may be bridges to be built.

There's that old line about everybody being brothers; I'll further consider everybody being each other's grandmothers (or alternate caregivers).
"I am not my brother's keeper (and each of us might be his grandmother)."

On Sat, Jun 25, 2022 at 1:53 AM Mitchell Verter <mitchell.verter@gmail.com> wrote:
On Fri, Jun 24, 2022 at 10:04 PM <drwdprice@aol.com> wrote:
As an anarchist who is a grandpa, and a grandpa who is an anarchist, I would love to see any writings (or songs or stories) on the subject.

Wayne Price

Well honestly Wayne, I think that's pretty important and interesting, really. I don't quite know how to think about it yet and I haven't been able to turn to my research yet. Perhaps you could become a subject of empirical research.

I am basically following through with the lines of questioning formulated Kropotkin, who calls mutual aid "a feature of the greatest importance for the maintenance of life, the preservation of each species, and its further evolution,” and further poses this idea of evolution in terms of _birth_, of material and maternal sustenance, a metabolic and generative transmutation of past substances into that which sustains me, into this thing that I consider myself. “If we have access to intellectual satisfactions and live in not too bad material circumstances, it is because we have benefited, through an accident of birth, by the exploitation to which the workers are subjected; and therefore the struggle for the emancipation of the workers is a duty, a debt which we must repay.” Here, the references are clear echoes of the metabolic described by Marx, how living labor power becomes is converted to the dead capital, consumable within commodities. But besides this there is also the generative of generations, the labor of birthing labor.

Anthropologist Sarah Hrdy seemingly answers the Kropotkin's inquiry into the evolutionary importance mutual aid in her book "Mothers and Others: The Evolutionary Origins of Mutual Understanding." I have been following this throughline for several years ty chrough the metaphorics of the mother, but Hardy clarifies that the nuturing of genesis occurs not just through the mother herself but to the community of _allomothers_, Other Mothers who perform the practice of mothering. The most siginifcant of these Other Mothers is the grandmother. Among other primate species, a higher proportion of human women live well past their childbearing years into old age. The mother's mother is particularly important. Matrilieanal kin will both guard the baby from the attackers and return the baby to its mother after watching it. According to Hrdy "Maternal grandmothers in particular attach high priority to keeping the mother and her children as well-nourished and healthy as possible", caring for both the cared-for grandchild and the caring mother. Hrdy concludes that the figure of the grandmother is the human secret to the development of mutual understanding, of prosociality, of mutual aid.
"In an emergency, however, these same socially marginalized old matrons become the most active in defending the group’s feeding grounds from neighboring groups. They are also the most daring in defending infants attacked by infanticidal males. Among langurs, sooty mangabeys, and savanna baboons, it is these 20- to30-­year-­olds who take bigger risks to defend an endangered infant than the victim’s own mother does."

"And no single class of care­givers made a bigger difference than grandmothers. Their presence was correlated with higher child survival
in ev­ery one of the twelve so­ci­e­ties for which relevant data had been recorded."

We see the grandmother's labor everywhere -- as abuelitas selling grasshoppers in the Oaxaca markets, for example. And below in the meditation on the "seven generations" by Kyle Taylor Lucas of the Tulalip Tribes and the Nlaka’pamux First Nation.

Not sure what you think?

-----Original Message-----
From: Mitchell Verter <mitchell.verter@gmail.com>
To: North American anarchist studies network <naasn@googlegroups.com>; APE Anarchist Political Ecology Group <APE@ape.yeswecannibal.org>; anarchist. academics (anarchist.academics@lists.aktivix.org) <anarchist.academics@lists.aktivix.org>; ASN (asn@lists.aktivix.org) <asn@lists.aktivix.org>; John L Protevi <protevi@lsu.edu>; John Clark <clark@loyno.edu>; Margaret Cerullo <margaretcerullo68@gmail.com>; Maria Antonia Carcelen Estrada <acarcelen@usfq.edu.ec>
Sent: Mon, Jun 13, 2022 2:35 pm
Subject: [NAASN] Re: Granarchism?

If anyone knows _where_ to look in Leguin or maybe Octavia Butler, that would be great -- I am a slow reader

I reported about the "next seven generations" a few years ago. Anyone know some good indigenous elaborations of this?
..., an enrolled member of the Tulalip Tribes (USA) and the Nlaka’pamux First Nation (Canada), speaks eloquently on the importance of the Olympia Port Blockade. “This struggle is important because our planet is on fire. As an indigenous woman, I feel a duty to honor my elders and the legacy of my ancestors in caring for this mother earth – and, moreover; I feel a responsibility to my grandchildren and the next seven generations to stand up to the economic machinery propped up by the government, specifically the Port of Olympia, in perpetuating the warming of this planet and the poisoning of water, essential to life. We call ourselves Water Protectors and we were especially inspired by the courageous stand taken at Standing Rock during DAPL. We indigenous peoples came together with our allies here at Olympia Stand to resist the Port of Olympia’s forced complicity in propping up dirty hydraulic fracturing in North Dakota that these proppants support.”

On Mon, Jun 13, 2022 at 1:57 PM Mitchell Verter <mitchell.verter@gmail.com> wrote:
Hey all,
I have been working for a while to consider how _maternal practice_ as defined by Sara Ruddick as "a practice that maintains safety of the child, promotes its strength, and allows it to flourish without establishing any ownership over it" in order to embody the anarchocommunist description of mutual aid “a feature of the greatest importance for the maintenance of life, the preservation of each species, and its further evolution,”

However, Anthropologist Sarah Hrdy posits the _grandmother_ as the allomother whose care is most important to caretaking and to species evolution.

Are there any good writings from or about anarchist grandparents and elders more generally? Maybe from Zapatista writings about elders or other indigenous sources? Or Leguin?

Thanks!
Mitchell
--

---

How can I
......explain
............to you
my state of mind?
The earth
has a whole skyful of lights...
The blue sky,
......a hell of a lot
............of stars.

Vladimir Mayakovsky

## --

How can I
......explain
............to you
my state of mind?
The earth
has a whole skyful of lights...
The blue sky,
......a hell of a lot
............of stars.

Vladimir Mayakovsky

--
You received this message because you are subscribed to the Google Groups "NAASN" group.
To unsubscribe from this group and stop receiving emails from it, send an email to naasn+unsubscribe@googlegroups.com.
To view this discussion on the web visit
https://groups.google.com/d/msgid/naasn/CACXHKRuErLxSCc_UQ1T3HaujkzN0gewJR3mTeC4g1PJvt%2BQsjg%40mail.gmail.com
.

## --

How can I
......explain
............to you
my state of mind?
The earth
has a whole skyful of lights...
The blue sky,
......a hell of a lot
............of stars.

Vladimir Mayakovsky

---

APE mailing list
APE@ape.yeswecannibal.org
http://ape.yeswecannibal.org/listinfo.cgi/ape-yeswecannibal.org

APE Meets Sundays 11:30 am - 1:00 pm US Central time on Zoom at https://lsu.zoom.us/j/93261631331?pwd=RGFFQzVuWHlTUExHc0lvSVBZdVJGdz09

## --

How can I
......explain
............to you
my state of mind?
The earth
has a whole skyful of lights...
The blue sky,
......a hell of a lot
............of stars.

Vladimir Mayakovsky

Two quotes from Alexis Pauline Gumbs
One from rest about them shedding skin and becoming other
The other about allomothering
